Two by-elections on 28th March 2019:

<hr/>

<h2>Clackmannanshire Central</h2>

Clackmannanshire council, Scotland; caused by the resignation of Scottish National Party councillor Phil Fairlie who had served since 2017.  The depute leader of the council, Fairlie is resigning for personal and professional reasons; away from the council he is the Scottish chairman of the POA, the trade union formerly known as the Prison Officers' Association.

Our two by-elections this week are north and south of the Border.  We start north of the border in the Wee County of Clackmannanshire, one of the many tiny counties which the Middle Ages left Scotland with; subsequent waves of local government reform have swept most of them away, but Clackmannanshire remains intact.  With a population of just over 50,000, it is the smallest local government district on the Scottish mainland.

The Central ward is based on the northern end of the town of Alloa together with the villages of Sauchie and Fishcross to the north.  Alloa railway station, opened in 2008 and recently electrified, lies on the ward's southern boundary and links the area to Glasgow.  The county town of Clackmannanshire, Alloa is an industrial centre particularly associated with the brewing industry; while Fishcross is a former mining village.  Sauchie is perhaps best known as the birthplace of Alan Hansen, the former Liverpool and Scotland defender who later served for many years as a pundit on <em>Match of the Day</em>; Hansen learned to play the beautiful game with the local youth side Sauchie Juniors.

Clackmannanshire has always been one of the stronger areas for the Scottish National Party, who have held the Scottish Parliament seat covering the county since 2003 and had a near-miss four years earlier.  However, the parliamentary seat covering Clackmannanshire (currently Ochil and South Perthshire) remained with Scottish Labour until their collapse following the independence referendum of 2014.  The Central ward was created some years before that poll in 2007, Labour beating the SNP 57-37 in votes and (this being Scotland, where they use proportional representation) 2-1 in seats; in 2012 the Labour lead narrowed to 49-41 but the seat count remained the same.

By the May 2017 local elections the context had changed - the SNP having gained the Ochil and South Perthshire parliamentary seat in the 2015 landslide - but the SNP couldn't translate this into a seat gain in Clackmannanshire Central.  Labour remained on top in the ward with 40% of the vote, and the SNP remained second with 38%; however, the drops in their vote share were to the benefit of the Conservatives, whose 17% was enough for them to gain the final seat in the ward off Labour.  Both Labour and the SNP had piled lots of votes on their lead candidates, and better balancing by either party would have shut the Tories out.  The Tories followed up on that by gaining the Ochil and South Perthshire parliamentary seat in the general election five weeks later, although one suspects that this is not the strongest area of the constituency for them.

This by-election will be an SNP defence, and could be crucial for control of the council.  The Nationalists run Clackmannanshire as a minority, with 7 out of 18 councillors plus this vacancy; Labour have 5, the Tories 4 and the remaining seat is held by an independent.  Their candidate is Jane McTaggart, who runs a social enterprise in the area and fought Clackmannanshire East in the 2017 elections.  The Labour candidate is Margaret Brookes, who is described as a Sauchie community stalwart; she probably starts as favourite, particularly if she can pick up Unionist transfers from the Conservatives.  The Tories have selected William Marlin, who works for his family's manufacturing business.  Completing the ballot paper are Marion Robertson for the Greens, John Biggam for the Liberal Democrats and Dawson Michie for UKIP.

May 2017 first preferences Lab 1029 SNP 987 C 428 Grn 133
May 2012 first preferences Lab 1204 SNP 1082 Ind 88 C 77
May 2007 first preferences Lab 1777 SNP 1138 C 190

John Shier BIGGAM, 17 Stirling Street, Tillicoultry FK13 6EA [Scottish Liberal Democrats]
Margaret BROOKES, 26 Ladywood, Clackmannan FK10 4SX [Scottish Labour Party]
William MARLIN, 1 Wardlaw Street, Coalsnaughton, Tillicoultry FK13 6LD [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Jane MCTAGGART, 35 Gaberston Avenue, Alloa FK10 3SR [Scottish National Party (SNP)]
Dawson MICHIE, 1 The Rowans, Sauchie, Alloa FK10 3EU [UKIP]
Marion ROBERTSON, The Anchorage, Muckhart, Dollar FK14 7JJ [Scottish Green Party]

<hr/>

<h2>Wallington North</h2>

Sutton council, South London; caused by the resignation of Liberal Democrat councillor Joyce Melican.

John Thomas BANNON, Flat 1, Harcourt Lodge, Croydon Road, Wallington SM6 7PB [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Sheila Anne BERRY, 81 Victoria Avenue, Wallington SM6 7JP [Labour Party]
Ashley DICKENSON, Flat 3, 47 Park Hill, Carshalton SM5 3SD [Christian Peoples Alliance]
Charlotte Anne LEONARD, 8 Devonshire Close, Carshalton SM5 2TJ [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Barry Robert LEWIS, 199 Stanley Park Road, Carshalton SM5 3JW [Liberal Democrat]
Gervais Seaforth SAWYER, 41 Lavington Road, Croydon CR0 4PQ [Independent]
Verity Jane THOMSON, 153 Park Lane, Carshalton SM5 3DX [Green Party]

