20th September 2012 sees five rather idiosyncratic by-elections in some of the most touristy parts of Britain.  This week we can go to the North York Moors to see Heartbeat being made, travel to Sherwood Forest to check in with Robin Hood and try our hand at poaching a country house estate, divert to Kent to check in with the creators of Bagpuss in a ward that, like Emily's shop, isn't all it seems at first sight, and end up in Cornwall to beam the resulting TV programme up to the satellites, for broadcast all over the world.  The Tories are defending in Kent and North Yorkshire while the Cornish and Nottinghamshire by-elections are both independent defences.  But this week, last week, it's off to the Marches for the first preview, with a a localist group having a council seat to defend in the city of Hereford.


ST NICHOLAS, Herefordshire council; caused by the death of Julie Woodward, a councillor from the It's Our County (Herefordshire) group, at the age of 51.  Also a member of the city council (which has only parish status), she had served as the 630th Mayor of Hereford in 2011/2.

One of six wards covering the ancient city of Hereford, St Nicholas ward covers the western end of the city, between the A438 road to Brecon and the River Wye.  The ward is named after St Nicholas Church at its eastern end.

This ward has a high councillor attrition rate, with this being the third by-election here in eight years.  The ward elected two Liberal Democrat councillors in 2003, Julie Woodward coming a fairly close third, and the Liberal Democrats held the ward at an April 2004 by-election.  Julie Woodward was first elected here in 2007 as an independent, defeating the Liberal Democrats and getting a running-mate elected as well.  The other councillor died in 2010 and the October 2010 by-election was the first electoral success for It's Our County, a localist group which had signed up five independent councillors, including Woodward.  Woodward and her running-mate were easily re-elected in 2011, the Liberal Democrats falling to third place behind the Conservatives.

It's rare for local by-election candidates to be notable enough to have their own Wikipedia pages already, but It's Our County have recruited one to hold the by-election: their candidate is the composer Anthony Powers, who lives just outside the ward in Breinton and has written classical works for the BBC and the Three Choirs Festival.  Standing against him are Mark McEvilly, a primary school teacher, for the Conservatives; David Hurds, who fought this ward last year, for the Liberal Democrats; and Stan Gyford, a parish councillor in Sutton St Nicholas, north of Hereford, for Labour.

Parliamentary constituency: Hereford and South Herefordshire

Stan Gyford (Lab)
David Hurds (LD)
Mark McEvilly (C)
Anthony Powers (IOCH)

May 2011 result IOCH 821/607 C 423/279 LD 320/312 Lab 273
October 2010 by-election IOCH 589 LD 385 Ind 173 C 156
May 2007 result Ind 670/576 LD 388/387 C 354/250 Grn 258/255 BNP 175
April 2004 by-election LD 936 C 783 Ind 524 Lab 288
May 2003 result LD 1105/1013 Ind 840/458 C 534/491

Stan GYFORD, Freens Court, Sutton St Nicholas, Hereford HR1 3AY [Labour Party Candidate]
David Anthony HURDS, 10 Trinity Road, Hereford HR4 0RS [Liberal Democrat]
Mark Thomas McEVILLY, 4 Luard Walk, Hereford HR2 7BA [Local Conservatives]
Anthony POWERS, The Coach House, Breinton, Hereford HR4 7PG [It's OUR County (Herefordshire)]

Prediction: IOCH 40 LD 24 C 22 Lab 14


BLEAN FOREST, Canterbury city council, Kent; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Hazel McCabe MBE at the age of 82.  The Mayor of Canterbury in 1985/6, she was the longest-serving member of the council and the only remaining member of the first Canterbury city council elected in 1973.

"Once upon a time, not so very long ago, there was a little girl and her name was Emily, and she had a shop."

The Blean Forest ward covers the rural area north of Canterbury and south of Whitstable; as the name suggests this is a heavily wooded area.  On the main road from Canterbury to Whitstable is the village of Blean, the centre of the wonderfully-named civil parish of St Cosmus and St Damian in the Blean.  Blean's most famous export comes from the Smallfilms television company, which from a barn in the village made the animated children's television series Ivor the Engine, the Clangers, and most famously Bagpuss.  To the east is the Hackington parish, based on the commuter village of Tyler Hill.

In an ordinary rural ward of Kent, those areas would probably set the tenor of politics.  But this is no ordinary rural ward; almost 70% of the electorate is situated in the two polling districts covering the campus of the University of Kent, which lies on a hill above Canterbury; the reason for the campus having two polling districts is that it straddles the old city boundary.  The current Chancellor of the university is the famous psephologist Sir Robert Worcester, founder of the opinion poll company MORI, now part of Ipsos.

Students tend not to vote in local elections, so the campus normally gets outvoted by the villages; particularly so in this by-election as Kent's new academic year doesn't start until next week.  We saw in last week's by-election in Loughborough Southfields, which was a surprise Conservative gain, how the absence of students in a student-dominated ward can create strange results.  The 2011 result for Blean Forest, even more so than in Luffbra, has to be looked at in that context.  The Conservatives polled almost the same vote total as in 2007, but a slight rise in the campus turnout, coupled with Labour failing to get their candidates nominated before the deadline, resulted in a very large vote for the Green Party, who polled a third of the vote and came a strong second.  It should be borne in mind that almost none of the 2011 Green Party voters will still be living in the ward.

That electorate turnover is reflected in the fact that none of the defeated candidates from 2011 are standing again.  The new Conservative candidate is Tyler Hill resident and Hackington parish councillor Ben Fitter, who is still in his twenties.  The Canterbury branch of the Green Party has nominated Russell Page, who is from Sturry and fought the city's Westgate ward last year.  Dan Smith, a Kent law graduate from the village of Rough Common just outside the ward, is the new Liberal Democrat candidate.  Labour have reselected education consultant Carol Goldstein, who lives in Blean, and this time they have managed to nominate her in time.  Two other candidates have come out of the woodwork: Howard Farmer, who lives in Whitstable and fought one of the Whitstable wards last year, is the UKIP candidate; and ghost hunter John Hippisley, from Harbledown, is standing as an independent.

Parliamentary constituency: Canterbury
Kent county council division: Canterbury West

Howard Farmer (UKIP)
Ben Fitter (C)
Carol Goldstein (Lab)
John Hippisley (Ind)
Russell Page (Grn)
Dan Smith (LD)

May 2011 result C 626/568 Grn 400/300 LD 184/173
May 2007 result C 625/560 LD 261/234 Lab 150/131
May 2003 result C 672/562 Grn 176/146 Lab 159/139

Howard Malcolm FARMER, 11 Suffolk Street, Whitstable, Kent CT5 4HA [U.K. Independence Party]
Ben FITTER, Dawes Court, Hackington Road, Tyler Hill, Canterbury, Kent CT2 9NG [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Carol GOLDSTEIN, 18 School Lane, Blean, Canterbury, Kent CT2 9JA [Labour Party Candidate]
John David Arthur HIPPISLEY, The Grange, Summer Hill, Harbledown, Canterbury, Kent CT2 8NN [Independent]
Russell John Charles PAGE, Linden House, 38 Mill Road, Sturry, Canterbury, Kent CT2 0AJ [Green Party]
Dan SMITH, 155 Rough Common Road, Rough Common, Canterbury, Kent CT2 9BS [Liberal Democrat]

Prediction: C 49 Lab 24 LD 11 UKIP 7 Grn 5 Ind 4


ESK VALLEY, Scarborough district council, North Yorkshire; caused by the resignation of Conservative councillor James Preston.

A large ward geographically, Esk Valley ward covers the countryside to the south and south-west of the town of Whitby, all of which (apart from the village of Sleights) is within the North York Moors National Park.  Running up the valley from Whitby the ward covers the villages of Sleights (part of the wonderfully-named Eskdaleside cum Ugglebarnby parish), Grosmont, Egton and Glaisdale, all of which are stops on the Middlesbrough to Whitby railway line (four trains per day).  At Grosmont the preserved North Yorkshire Moors Railway branches off through the moors to Pickering, with its first stop at the tourist trap village of Goathland, the setting for Aidensfield in the TV series Heartbeat.

The ward is a strong Conservative area and isn't seriously contested by the other parties.  The Conservatives were unopposed here in 2003.

Defending for the Conservatives, Guy Coulson is the only candidate to the live in the ward; an Eskdaleside cum Ugglebarnby parish councillor with a horticulture and arboriculture business, he lives in Sleights.  There are two Whitby-based candidates, Simon Parkes of Labour and independent Mike Ward, who both fought Whitby wards at the last Scarborough council election in 2011.  The ballot paper is completed by two fringe candidates who give addresses in Scarborough, Michael James for UKIP and Ed Scott for the English Democrats.

Parliamentary constituency: Scarborough and Whitby
North Yorkshire county council division: Esk Valley

Guy Coulson (C)
Michael James (UKIP)
Simon Parkes (Lab)
Ed Scott (EDP)
Mike Ward (Ind)

May 2011 result C 1183/928 Ind 417 Lab 379
May 2007 result C 1069/884 LD 645 Ind 317
May 2003 result 2 C unopposed

Guy COULSON, 5 Iburndale Lane, Sleights, Whitby, North Yorkshire YO22 5EL [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Michael John JAMES, 17 Coniston Gardens, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO12 4JH [UK Independence Party]
Simon Bard PARKES, 30 Prospect Hill, Whitby, North Yorkshire YO21 1QD [Labour Party Candidate]
Ed SCOTT, Flat 2, 11 The Crescent, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO11 2PW [English Democrats - Putting England First]
Mike WARD, Low Heulah Cottage, Dunsley, Whitby, North Yorkshire YO21 3TL [Independent]

Prediction: C 64 Lab 21 Ind 10 UKIP 4 EDP 1


RUFFORD, Nottinghamshire county council; caused by the death of Independent county councillor Les Ward at the age of 69.  A former policeman and village bobby in the village of Edwinstowe for some years, more recently he ran an arts organisation in Edwinstowe.

"A buck or doe believe it so
A pheasant or a hare
Were set on earth for everyone
Quite equally to share

So poacher bold, as I unfold
Keep up your gallant heart
And think about those poachers bold
That night in Rufford Park."
- Rufford Park Poachers

A large county division close to the geographic centre of Nottinghamshire, Rufford division includes much of what's left of Sherwood Forest, including the touristy visitor centre and the Major Oak, below which Robin Hood and his merrie men hid out according to local legend.  

There is no village called Rufford (although there is one in Lancashire, just to confuse the issue); instead Rufford division is named after Rufford Abbey, a Cistercian monastery which later became a country house.  The folk song Rufford Park Poachers commemorates an incident in 1851 in which forty poachers assembled in the estate; a fight with the gamekeepers ensued and one of the gamekeepers ended up dead.

Interesting although this tourist information is, it's not really relevant to the three villages that make up the division's population: Clipstone, Edwinstowe and Bilsthorpe.  Edwinstowe lies at the centre of the forest, but its main employer isn't the Sherwood Forest Visitor Centre; it's Thoresby Colliery, a deep coal mine which is still working today and supports the championship-standard Thoresby Colliery brass band.  Clipstone, a village a few miles east of Mansfield, had a working pit until 2003 whose headstocks are the largest in Europe.  The smaller village of Bilsthorpe had a working coal mine until 1997, which was the scene of an appalling disaster in 1993 when a roof collapsed, killing three miners.

With such an unambiguous dependence on coal-mining in this division, it's a measure of just how far Labour sunk in Nottinghamshire in 2009 that they not only lost the division, but finished last of the three candidates behind Les Ward and the Conservative candidate, although they were only 200 votes behind Ward.  However, this defeat was on the cards after Labour won just one of the district council seats in the division at the Newark and Sherwood district council election in 2007 (in Clipstone ward; Labour also had one seat in Rainworth ward which covers a large part of the division whose only residential development is Sherwood Forest Center Parcs).  Edwinstowe returned two independent district councillors and Bilsthorpe was included in a ward with the Tory-voting village of Farnsfield, which outvoted it.

The 2011 district results saw Labour recover to take all four seats in Clipstone and Edwinstowe wards, although the Tories narrowly held on to Farnsfield and Bilsthorpe ward.

Les Ward was a member of the Nottinghamshire Independents group on the council, and they have nominated retired electrician Jim Gregson, from just outside the division in the Mansfield suburb of Forest Town, to hold their seat the by-election.  The Conservative candidate is Daniel Mottishaw, from Edwinstowe, and Labour have selected Edwinstowe ward councillor John Peck.  The ballot paper is completed by Carole Terzza, the UKIP candidate, who gives an address in Hucknall.

Parliamentary constituency: Sherwood
Newark and Sherwood district wards: Clipstone, Edwinstowe, Farnsfield and Bilsthorpe (part), Rainworth (part)

Jim Gregson (Notts Ind)
Daniel Mottishaw (C)
John Peck (Lab)
Carole Terzza (UKIP)

June 2009 result Ind 1309 C 1259 Lab 1109
May 2005 result Lab 2909 C 1542 Ind 954 Ind 606

Jim GREGSON, 163 Clipstone Road West, Forest Town, Mansfield, Nottinghamshire NG19 0BT [Nottinghamshire Independents]
Daniel Richard MOTTISHAW, 9 Maid Marion Drive, Edwinstowe, Mansfield, Nottinghamshire NG21 9RD [Conservative Party Candidate]
John PECK, 3 Redcroft Close, Edwinstowe, Mansfield, Nottinghamshire NG21 9PX [The Labour Party Candidate]
Carole TERZZA, 83 Farleys Lane, Hucknall, Nottingham NG15 6DP [Uk Independence Party]

Prediction: Lab 52 NottsInds 26 C 15 UKIP 7


ST KEVERNE AND MENEAGE, Cornwall council; caused by the death of long-serving Independent councillor Pam Lyne, who was one of the original members of the now-abolished Kerrier district council and had served as an Independent group leader.

The UK's second most southerly ward, St Keverne and Meneage covers the northern half of the Lizard peninsula, between Helston and the Helford River.  It covers seven parishes, from Gunwalloe on the west coast to St Keverne on the east coast, and runs inland to the village of Gweek.

St Keverne was the starting point for the 1497 Cornish Rebellion, in which an army led by Michael an Gof marched on London, when they were defeated in the Battle of Deptford Bridge.  In more modern times the area has been a centre for pioneering communications: on the west coast of the ward is Poldhu, from where Marconi's first transatlantic wireless message was sent, while inland is the Earth Station at Goonhilly Downs, once the world's largest satellite earth station.  The ward also includes part of Culdrose Airfield, a naval air station where the Olympic flame arrived in Britain for the recent London Olympics.

Pam Lyne had been a long-serving district and county councillor, but she had a serious battle for her seat at the only election so far for the Cornwall unitary council, in 2009; she won by just 14 votes over the Conservative candidate and polled only 35% of the vote.  Before 2009 Lyne represented the Meneage and South Helston division on Cornwall county council and Meneage ward on Kerrier district council, for which she was only opposed by UKIP at the final Kerrier election in 2007.  All of the predecessor wards and county divisions elected Independents before 2009, some of them without opposition.

There is no Independent candidate this time so the composition of Cornwall council will change as a result of this by-election.  The Conservatives have nominated Walter Sanger, who was the second of the three Independent candidates in 2009; he was the last district councillor for St Keverne ward, being unopposed there in 2003 and 2007.  The Liberal Democrats have renominated Nicholas Driver for his second go at this ward; Labour have selected Steve Richards, who fought Camborne West in 2009; and the UKIP candidate is Sandra Martin, who fought Marazion in 2009.

Parliamentary constituency: St Ives

Nicholas Driver (LD)
Sandra Martin (UKIP)
Steven Richards (Lab)
Walter Sanger (C)

June 2009 result Ind 673 C 657 Ind 356 LD 127 Ind 67 Lab 33

Nicholas David DRIVER, Old Seaview Stables, Treleague, St Keverne, Helston, Cornwall TR12 6PQ [Liberal Democrats]
Sandra MARTIN, Heather Brae, Newmill, Penzance, Cornwall TR20 8UY [The UK Independence Party]
Steven Frederick RICHARDS, 16 Higher Pumpfield Row, Pool, Redruth, Cornwall TR15 3PY [The Labour Party Candidate]
Walter Norman SANGER, Tregonning Lea, St Keverne, Helston, Cornwall TR12 6QE [Conservative Party]

Prediction: C 60 LD 23 UKIP 10 Lab 7