The electoral main course of the May elections is almost upon us.  To whet your appetite until then , we have an hors d'oeuvre consisting of a single council by-election on 26th April.  We're off to the Norfolk Broads.

WATERSIDE, North Norfolk; caused by the resignation of Liberal Democrat councillor Simon Partridge.  A former leader of the council, he is now working as the boss of a Broads study centre at How Hill.

The name Waterside is an apt one, as the ward is surrounded on three sides by the Broads National Park.  To the west is the River Ant, while to the south and east is the River Thurne, which includes to the north-east the largest of Norfolk's broads, Hickling Broad.  In the middle is the ward's population, which is organised into six villages: Hickling, Hickling Green and Hickling Heath in the north-east of the ward, Catfield in the west of the ward on the A149 Cromer-Great Yarmouth road, Ludham in the south-west on the A1062 Hoveton-Potter Heigham road, and Potter Heigham in the south-east where the two roads meet at a medieval bridge over the Thurne.

In 2003 and 2007 the ward elected two Lib Dem councillors, with Simon Partridge having a sizeable personal vote and the second Lib Dem seat being much more marginal.  A nomination papers cockup meant that the Lib Dems only got Simon Partridge on the ballot in 2011, and the Conservatives gained a seat, in fact topping the poll in the division as they gained overall control of North Norfolk council.

The statement of persons nominated has revealed some interesting tensions within the local Liberal Democrats.  The outgoing Lib Dem councillor Simon Partridge has nominated the new Lib Dem candidate Paul Williams, from outside the ward in Neatishead, although he apparently had to be selected at the last moment after a previously selected candidate stood down despite the Lib Dems having already distributed leaflets in support of her.  In the meantime Simon Partridge's wife Jean, who runs their bed-and-breakfast in Catfield, is standing as an independent.  To further complicate matters, hoping to gain a second Conservative seat is Paul Rice from Potter Heigham, who was elected as the local county councillor in 2009 for South Smallburgh division - for the Liberal Democrats, gaining the seat from the Conservatives, but then defected to the Conservatives.  To add extra spice, during the campaign the Conservatives have threatened legal action over statements on a Lib Dem leaflet.  Also on the ballot paper are Jeff Parkes of UKIP, from Ludham, who fought the ward last year; Denise Burke, from outside the ward in Happisburgh, standing for Labour who once represented the area and are apparently working the ward hard; and Anne Filgate, from Catfield, who is the Green Party candidate.

Constituent parishes: Catfield, Hickling, Ludham, Potter Heigham
Norfolk county council division: South Smallburgh
Parliamentary constituency: North Norfolk
ONS Travel to Work Area: Norwich (Hickling parish), Great Yarmouth (rest of ward)

Denise Burke (Lab)
Anne Filgate (Grn)
Jeff Parkes (UKIP)
Jean Partridge (Ind)
Paul Rice (C)
Paul Williams (LD)

May 2011 result C 773/553 LD 752 UKIP 318 Lab 311/220
May 2007 result LD 861/679 C 601/458 Lab 149
May 2003 result LD 781/563 Ind 545 C 459/369

Denise Lesley BURKE, Thrums, Happisburgh, Norwich NR12 0PW [The Labour Party Candidate]
Anne Patricia FILGATE, The Rose House, Limes Road, Catfield, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk NR29 5DG [Green Party]
Jeff PARKES, Cold Harbour Barn, Cold Harbour Road, Ludham, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk NR29 5NT [UK Independence Party]
Jean PARTRIDGE, The Limes, Limes Road, Catfield, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk NR29 5DG [Independent]
Paul Kenneth RICE, 7 Vicarage Close, Potter Heigham, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk NR29 5LE [Conservative Party Candidate]
Paul Howard WILLIAMS, Swift Cottage, Water Lane, Neatishead, Norwich NR12 8BL [Liberal Democrat]

