The lean period for by-elections following the ordinary May elections continues, with a single by-election in Cumberland on 24th May.

ASPATRIA AND WHARRELS, Cumbria County Council; caused by the resignation of Conservative councillor Mike Johnson, who is now employed by the county council on its highways team and therefore ineligible to be a councillor.  He had previously been working for the roads contractor Amey but the county council has brought its highways work in-house.

This county division covers some rather beautiful countryside running from the small town of Aspatria, on the Maryport-Carlisle railway, south into the Lake District national park as far as the northern edge of Keswick.  The division includes Skiddaw, England's fourth-highest mountain.  One of the villages included in the ward is Bassenthwaite, which gives its name to the Lake District's only actual Lake (all the other bodies of water are called Meres, Tarns and so on).

The division was first created on its current boundaries in 2001, and was a very close fight between the Conservatives and Labour, the Tories eventually winning by just 20 votes.  The Conservative majority greatly increased over the next two elections, reaching 719 over Labour by the 2009 election, after which this division's councillor Jim Buchanan became Leader of the Council.  Unfortunately he served as leader for just ten months until his death in April 2010, shortly after being diagnosed with cancer.  Mike Johnson easily won the resulting byelection, which bizarrely was a straight fight between the Conservatives and the Green Party.  His resignation has caused a second by-election in this division within two years.

Analysis of the district council results in the area would suggest that the main area of Labour strength is Aspatria, which had coal-mining many years ago and can still poll a good Labour vote, although the ward has returned two Independent councillors since 2007.  The two rural wards in the division, Boltons and Wharrels, are often unopposed (the area is part of the west Cumbria Allerdale district, based on Workington, which tends to have a lot of unopposed returns) but were both contested last year: the long-serving Independent councillor for Boltons ward was easily re-elected in a straight fight with the Conservatives; while in Wharrels the Conservative councillor had little trouble beating off competition from Labour, Lib Dem and Green candidates to be re-elected with 57%, but Labour came a respectable second with 31%.

While the Conservatives are probably favoured to hold the ward, as can be seen there isn't a lot to go on from recent election results.  The defending Conservative candidate is Jim Lister, who represents Solway ward on Allerdale district council.  Another district councillor standing is Bill Finlay, one of the two Independent councillors for Aspatria ward, who has attacked Lister over who should take the credit for saving an Aspatria care home from a recent closure proposal by the county council.  The Labour candidate is Brian Cope, who fought Wharrels ward last year and had the aforementioned good result; the Lib Dems' Phill Roberts fought Aspatria ward last year; and the Green Party candidate is David Bober.

Constituent parishes: Allhallows, Aspatria, Bassenthwaite, Blennerhasset and Torpenhow, Boltons, Bothel and Threapland, Gilcrux, Ireby and Uldale, Plumbland, Underskiddaw
Constituent Allerdale district wards: Aspatria, Boltons, Wharrels
Parliamentary constituency: Workington
ONS Travel to Work Area: Workington and Keswick

David Bober (Grn)
Brian Cope (Lab)
Bill Finlay (Ind)
Jim Lister (C)
Phill Roberts (LD)

Sept 2010 by-election C 823 Grn 342
June 2009 result C 1276 Lab 557 LD 413
May 2005 result C 1609 Lab 997 LD 717
June 2001 result C 1467 Lab 1447 LD 527

David John BOBER, 81 High Brigham, Brigham, Cockermouth, Cumbria CA13 0TG [Green Party]
Brian George COPE, The Garth, Uldale, Wigton, Cumbria CA7 1HA [Labour Party Candidate]
Bill FINLAY, 2 East Crescent, Aspatria, Wigton, Cumbria CA7 3EF [Independent]
Jim LISTER, Oughterside Mill, Oughterside, Wigton, Cumbria CA7 2PZ [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Phill ROBERTS, Thistledome House, Low Scales, Aspatria, Wigton, Cumbria CA7 3NE [Liberal Democrat]