Last week I previewed the 2012 local elections in Greater Manchester together with Sefton; as a follow-up here's a post with the results.

BOLTON

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/bolton11.png]

Every ward in Bolton voted the same way as it did last year.  Labour gained Breightmet (outer east Bolton), Horwich and Blackrod, Little Lever and Darcy Lever, and Westhoughton North and Chew Moor from the Conservatives, gained Kearsley and Westhoughton South from the Liberal Democrats, and held the by-election gain from the Liberal Democrats in Horwich North East.  Labour had swings in their favour in their two other target wards (Hulton and Smithills) and reduced the majority to less than 100 votes in each case but failed to take either ward, Roger Hayes successfully putting the squeeze on the Tory vote in Smithills.

The new council is Lab 41 (+6) C 14 (-4) LD 3 (-2).


BURY

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/bury12.png]

Labour had a very good election result in Bury, picking up all three Prestwich wards from the Lib Dems and gaining seven seats from the Conservatives.  Bury produced possibly the biggest shock of the night in Greater Manchester, Labour gaining Tottington from the Conservative group leader on a huge swing.  The only wards not to vote Labour were the safe Conservative wards of Church (western Bury) and North Manor (a series of villages straddling the Irwell Valley between Bury, Tottington and Ramsbottom), together with the marginal Pilkington Park (western Whitefield) which was held by former Bury South parliamentary candidate Michelle Wiseman.  My sister is very pleased with the Labour gain in Radcliffe North having been dissatisfied with dealings she had with the defeated Conservative councillor.

The new council is Lab 36 (+10) C 13 (-7) LD 2 (-3).


MANCHESTER

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/manchester11.png]

England's second city (I stand by this despite negative comments on the preview post) produced a second consecutive redwash.  Labour gained all 13 Lib Dem wards, including the Lib Dem group leader Marc Ramsbottom in City Centre ward.  

The mayoral referendum produced a rather narrow No vote, 53.2% to 46.8%.

The new council is Lab 87 (+13) LD 8 (-13) Ind Lab 1.


OLDHAM

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/oldham12.png]

The home of the tubular bandage produced ten gains for Labour who strengthen their grip on the council.  Labour gained all the Conservative wards, all the Lib Dem wards in Oldham proper and Royton South from the Lib Dems.  In Saddleworth the Conservatives repeated last year's gain of Saddleworth South from the Lib Dems; the Lib Dems were on the right side of another photo-finish in Saddleworth North, the late Ken Hulme's torch having been passed on to a new Independent candidate; while this year the Lib Dems held on to Saddleworth West and Lees which they had lost to Labour last year.

The new council is Lab 43 (+10) LD 14 (-7) C 2 (-3) Vacant 1.  The vacancy is due to the recent death of a Labour councillor for Failsworth East and a by-election will be held there in due course.


ROCHDALE

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/rochdale12.png]

Like Manchester, Rochdale continues to produce results which wouldn't have been imaginable even two years ago, with another Lib Dem wipeout.  After defections are taken account of Labour gained ten wards, five each from the Conservatives and Lib Dems.  This was an even better Labour performance than last year, with the Conservatives only winning super-rich Bamford and Norden in western Rochdale together with Wardle and West Littleborough.  The absence of a Lib Dem candidate enabled Labour to narrowly gain the very middle-class Littleborough Lakeside ward from a Lib Dem to Conservative defector.

The new council is Lab 42 (+10) C 13 (-5) LD 5 (-5)


SALFORD

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/salford12.png]

As expected, the Lib Dems were wiped out of the council, losing their three wards in inner Salford.  Labour also picked up the two Independent seats and the two Conservative wards they had won the last two years, plus also narrowly gaining Walkden South from the Conservatives, which had looked safe in 2011 thanks to a large personal vote for Iain Lindley, the moderator of the former Vote UK forum.

The new council is Lab 52 (+8) C 8 (-3) LD 0 (-3) Ind 0 (-2).

Labour's Ian Stewart won the first Salford mayoral election, beating the Conservatives' Karen Garrido by 70% to 30% in the runoff after narrowly failing to win on first preferences.


STOCKPORT

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/stockport12.png]

Before the election this council had looked rather uncertain, the Liberal Democrats having lost their majority last year and continuing to rule the council as a minority with the support of the Heald Green Ratepayers.  Well, Labour did make gains here but the Lib Dems only had a net loss of one councillor, although he was the Leader of the Council, Labour gaining Offerton ward.  Labour's other gain from the Lib Dems, Davenport and Cale Green, was offset by the Lib Dems gaining Cheadle and Gatley from the Conservatives, the only Lib Dem gain in Greater Manchester.  On the Lancashire side of Stockport, Labour gained Heatons North from the Conservatives and picked up the Lib Dem-to-Independent defector's seat in Brinnington and Central.  The Liberal Democrats put the squeeze on the Conservative vote to narrowly hold Manor ward - Labour will not have been helped by one of their councillors for that ward leaving the party and sitting as 'People Matter', apparently after finding himself unable to afford the party subs.

The new council is LD 28 (-1) Lab 21 (+4) C 10 (-2) Heald Green Ratepayers 3 People Matter 1 Ind 0 (-1).  The Lib Dem minority administration looks set to continue.


TAMESIDE

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/tameside12.png]

Tameside elections are rarely interesting and this was no exception.  Labour picked up the Independent seat in Mossley and three seats from the Conservatives, including a rather decisive win in the borough's only marginal ward, Hyde Werneth.

The new council is Lab 52 (+4) C 5 (-3) Ind 0 (-1).


TRAFFORD

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/trafford12.png]

The Tories came surprisingly close to losing Trafford, failing to pick up either of the two Lib Dem wards and losing three wards to Labour, Broadheath, Sale Moor and Urmston.  While this still leaves the Conservatives with a majority of 5 in the council chamber, there were four wards they held with majorities under 200 votes: St Mary's in Sale, Flixton and both Davyhulme wards; if three of those wards (two of which were safe last year) had flipped to Labour the council would have become hung.  No overall control, perhaps Labour becoming the largest party, could now be a realistic prospect after the 2014 election.

The new council is C 34 (-3) Lab 25 (+3) LD 4.


WIGAN

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/wigan12.png]

Wigan stands apart rather from the rest of Greater Manchester, not just geographically but because of its industry, I said in the preview; and this also applies to its election results this year with a relatively underwhelming result for Labour compared to the rest of Greater Manchester.  True, Labour did pick up three seats from the Conservatives and wipe out the long-running Community Action thorn in their side, but they failed to knock out any of the Independent seats (except the ex-Community Action councillor in Ashton), the Lib Dems in Tyldesley or the Conservatives in Lowton East; both these last two wards are in the rock-solid Labour Leigh constituency and all of those wards are ones which Labour have won in the last two years.  The dissident-Conservative Standish Independents gained a second seat from the Conservatives in Standish with Langtree ward and can now form a group on the council.

The new council is Lab 64 (+5) Ind 7 (-1) LD 2 Standish Ind 2 (+1) C 1 (-4) CA 0 (-1).  It's rather hilarious that the single Conservative councillor represents the old mining town of Lowton rather than middle-class areas such as Orrell or Standish.


SEFTON

[Map of 2012 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2012/sefton12.png]

I previewed Sefton because I thought it would be a council to watch this time round and could throw up some interesting results.  I wrote in the preview that for Labour to take overall control of Sefton, for the first time ever, they would need to take all the near-certain gains (Manor, Molyneux, Sudell and Victoria) and two of the three tossup wards (Blundellsands, Park and Ravenmeols).  Well, Labour did indeed take all the near-certain gains.  Let's have a look at the rest of the council.

In Southport, the Liberal Democrats held all their seats, gained Cambridge ward from the Conservatives and Duke's ward from an Independent Conservative.  The Conservatives held Ainsdale ward.

In Bootle, Labour obviously held all the wards, polling 92% in Linacre ward.

Labour gained all three Maghull wards, including the last Lib Dem redoubt of Park ward which wasn't even close.

Labour won all the wards in Crosby, including for the first time ever the knife-edge Conservative marginal of Blundellsands, which again wasn't even close.

Finally, what was for me the most shocking result of the 2012 election: Labour won both wards in Formby, gaining Ravenmeols from the Conservatives and Harington, the ward containing Millionaires' Row, from the Conservative to UKIP defector.  The result in Harington was one of the closest three way splits you will ever see, the defending UKIP councillor in third place with 29% to 30% each for the official Conservatives and Labour, Labour finishing on top by eight votes.

I think the decision to preview this one was vindicated.  The new council is Lab 36 (+8) LD 20 (-3) C 7 (-3) Ind C 3 (-1) UKIP 0 (-1), giving a Labour majority of six seats.


