Instead of a by-election preview (there are dozens of by-elections this week and there is a limit to what I can do), this week I preview the 2008 local elections in the county of Greater Manchester.

All ten Greater Manchester councils hold elections for one-third of the council in three years of a four-year cycle.  This year the seats elected in 2008 are up, and that was generally a bad year for Labour; in 2008 the Conservatives actually finished top of the poll across the county.  With the current state of politics, this is likely to translate into large Labour gains on 3rd May.

BOLTON

We start alphabetically with Bolton council, which in addition to the namesake town includes the smaller towns of Blackrod, Farnworth, Horwich, Kearsley, Little Lever and Westhoughton together with the South Turton area (Bradshaw and Bromley Cross).  At its creation in 1973 this council was Conservative; Labour took control in 1980 and held control until 2003.  The 2011 elections saw Labour regain an overall majority after the council had been hung for eight years.  

The 60 seats are currently split 35 Labour, 18 Conservative and 5 Liberal Democrat, with two vacancies caused by the resignation of two Conservative councillors in Bradshaw ward.  To fill these vacancies all three seats in Bradshaw ward will be up for election (the ordinary election plus the two vacancies), making a very rare treble election.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/bolton08.png]

In 2008 the Conservatives topped the poll and won 9 seats to 7 for Labour and 4 for the Lib Dems.  Last year Labour gained the seat in Horwich North East ward from the Lib Dems in a double vacancy election, so the Tories are defending 9 seats (plus the two vacancies) to 8 for Labour and 3 for the Lib Dems.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/bolton11.png]

Last year Labour won 14 seats to 5 for the Conservatives and 1 for the Lib Dems.  If these results are repeated Labour stand to gain Breightmet, Horwich and Blackrod, Little Lever and Darcy Lever, and Westhoughton North and Chew Moor from the Conservatives, and Kearsley and Westhoughton South from the Liberal Democrats, which would result in a council of Lab 41 C 14 LD 3.  Of these results, only Westhoughton North could be described as marginal (Lab 47.8 C 43.1 LD 9.2), although Horwich North East was a double vacancy and if you take out the top Labour candidate (who outperformed the councillor up this year by nearly 350 votes) you get an interesting three-way marginal.  Horwich North East was once a Lib Dem stronghold but the retirement last year of Cllr Ronson and Cllr Mrs Ronson seems to had a detrimental effect on their ground machine.

On the basis of last year's results Labour can also target Hulton ward (south-west Bolton, rather divided between Tory Over Hulton and more mixed Deane) and the borough's last Lib Dem ward, middle-class Smithills in north-west Bolton, both of which would fall on a 4% swing.  Smithills is the ward where I live and for what it's worth I am getting a lot of Labour literature.  Bradshaw, where the treble vacancy is, is a safe Conservative ward and the Tories should have no trouble holding all three seats.

Personalities up for election this year include the Leader of the Council Cliff Morris, who will have no trouble being re-elected in safe Labour Halliwell ward (inner north-west Bolton, 76% Labour last year) and the Lib Dem group leader Roger Hayes, who as stated has a fight on his hands in Smithills.


BURY

Directly east of Bolton is the town of Bury in the Irwell Valley, which gives its name to one of the smallest metropolitan districts based on that valley.  In addition to Bury itself, the borough includes the towns of Ramsbottom and Tottington to the north, and Radcliffe, Whitefield and Prestwich to the south.  The council was hung at its first election in 1973, gained by the Conservatives in 1975 and then gained by Labour in 1986; Labour held the council until 2006 with the exception of a hung interlude in 1992-95; more recently the council had a short-lived Conservative majority from 2008-2010.  Labour gained overall control last year by one seat thanks to the toss of a coin, after a tied result in Ramsbottom.

The current composition of the 51 seats is 25 Labour, 20 Conservative and 5 Liberal Democrat with one vacancy.  As can be seen, there is no longer a Labour overall majority due to the death of Cllr John Byrne, who represented the safe-Labour East ward; he would have been due up for re-election in May so there hasn't been a by-election.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/bury08.png]

The Conservatives have a lot to lose here with half their council group up for re-election; in 2008 they won 10 seats to 4 for Labour and three for the Lib Dems.  As stated, one of the Labour seats is currently vacant.  To add to the Conservatives' problems their former council leader Bob Bibby and fellow Tory councillor Jim Taylor were arrested in February on suspicion of taking bribes in relation to a planning application.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/bury11.png]

In 2011 Labour won 13 seats to 4 for the Conservatives, the Lib Dems drawing a blank for the first time since 1990.  If those results are repeated Labour would gain the three Lib Dem seats (the three Prestwich wards of Holyrood, St Mary's and Sedgley) and six of the Conservative wards: Elton, Radcliffe East, Radcliffe North, Ramsbottom, Redvales and Unsworth.  

All the Lib Dem wards look like goners with the possible exception of their traditional stronghold of Holyrood ward, north-east Prestwich, won by Labour last year by 6 points; the other two Prestwich wards had been gained during 2006-2008 off the back of opposition to a proposed closure of Prestwich Arts College (which, incidentally, educated me, so it can't have been all bad).  The long-serving and high-profile Vic D'Albert is up for re-election in Holyrood this year, and if the Prestwich Lib Dems have any sense they'll put everything into getting him returned and concede the other two Prestwich wards without a fight.

Labour can also be almost certain of picking up the working-class ward of Radcliffe East (how the Tories ever won this in the first place is an interesting question) together with Redvales and Unsworth wards in southern Bury proper.  Elton (north-western Bury) and Radcliffe North (a rather divided ward between the Tory village of Ainsworth and the Labour Turks Road estate; my parents and sister live in this ward) were closer results last year but Labour should also be confident of picking those wards up.  Ramsbottom surely can't again be as close as last year's tied result, but which side will gain the extra vote this time is anyone's guess.  

A good Labour performance last year just about tipped Tottington into the marginal column, but the Tory lead here was still 9.9 points and this is probably a step too far for Labour this time; the Tory group leader Roger Brown is up for re-election here.  So if Labour want to stretch into new wards the clear target is Pilkington Park, the western middle-class half of Whitefield, which was Tory by just 2.4 points last year.  


MANCHESTER

Ah, Manchester.  The second city of England and a fascinating battle for control this year between the red side and the blue side.  But away from the football pitch it's all rather different, with Manchester having been continuously Labour-controlled since the metropolitan boroughs were established in 1974.  The only year in which Labour failed to win a majority of the city's wards was 1975, when the Tories won 18 seats to 15 for Labour (although Labour did won only 6 out of 20 seats in the 1977 election to the now-abolished Greater Manchester County Council).

Much is always made by Labour on election night programmes of the fact that the Tories can't win a council seat in Manchester (they have drawn a blank at every election since 1994) being indicative of something.  In truth it isn't because the city council includes only a relatively small part of the conurbation named after it; even within the M60 orbital motorway perhaps only half of the area is covered by Manchester city council.  In fact, you can walk away from the town hall for ten minutes and cross the border into Salford.  The Tories have an electoral base in Leeds because Leeds city council covers a large rural area as far out as Wetherby, and in Birmingham because in 1974 Birmingham annexed the Tory-voting town of Sutton Coldfield; the only change made to Manchester in 1974 was to add in the essentially uninhabited Ringway parish, and that was only done because Ringway includes Manchester Airport.

The current composition of the 96 seats on the council is 74 Labour to 21 Lib Dem and one Independent Labour - Henry Cooper of Moston ward, who has left the party over its support for a new football stadium in Newton Heath for the non-league side FC United of Manchester (who currently groundshare with Bury and often draw bigger crowds).

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/manchester08.png]

Almost two-thirds of the Lib Dem council group is up for re-election this year, with the Lib Dems having won 13 wards in 2008 to 19 for Labour.

The 2011 results in Manchester form one of the clearest cases in psephology of a picture painting a thousand words:

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/manchester11.png]

It's fair to say that nobody saw this coming, not least the local Lib Dems who right up to the end were still trying to gain wards off Labour.  However, the detail of the results suggest that this time round anything other than another redwash would be a shock.  The closest result in 2011 was in Withington ward, which Labour won by 9.4 points from the Lib Dems.

Possibly more interesting this year will be the result of the Mayoral referendum.  Labour locally are not keen on the idea, and the Leader of Council Sir Richard Leese (who is up for re-election this year in Crumpsall) already has much of the profile an elected mayor would probably have.  Nevertheless the recent Mayoral referendum in next-door Salford passed in the teeth of opposition from their Labour group largely thanks to campaigning from about four English Democrat activists, so anything is possible.


OLDHAM

Anybody who has been to Edinburgh recently will know how the city centre has been blighted by the tram works, which have been marked by a comprehensive failure on the part of the city council and Scottish government to do anything about the incompentence of their contractors.  Oldham has suffered even worse from tram works, with its rail link to Manchester and Rochdale closing in 2009 for conversion to a new branch of the Metrolink tram system.  Originally planned for opening in autumn 2011, this has not yet happened but may happen at some point later this year.  The tram works have led to the demolition of perhaps Oldham's most famous landmark: the railway bridge over Mumps roundabout announcing "Welcome to Oldham, the home of the tubular bandage".

As well as the home of the tubular bandage, Oldham council covers the smaller towns of Chadderton down the hill to the west, Failsworth to the south-west, Royton, and Shaw and Crompton to the north, Lees to the east and, transferred from Yorkshire, the parish of Saddleworth.  Saddleworth, Lees and eastern Oldham are of course home to the greatest free show on Earth, the Whit Friday brass band contests; the date for your diary this year is Friday 1st June.

Oldham council has been controlled by all three parties over the years: Labour from 1973, hung from 1976, Conservative from 1978, Labour from 1980, hung from 1994, Labour from 1996, Lib Dem from 2000, hung from 2002, Labour from 2003, hung from 2007.  Labour took control last year from a Lib Dem/Tory coalition.

Currently Labour have 33 councillors to 21 for the Lib Dems and 5 for the Conservatives.  There is one vacancy due to the recent death of Labour councillor Barbara Dawson, who represented Failsworth East ward; a by-election will be held here in due course.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/oldham08.png]

In 2008 the Lib Dems won 11 wards, Labour 5 and the Conservatives 4, so over half the Lib Dem group is up for election this year.  The Tory councillor for Failsworth West has had an interesting four years, defecting Conservative to Independent, then joining the Green Party, then going back to Independent and finally back to the Conservatives.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/oldham11.png]

The 2011 election saw a Labour landslide with 16 seats to three for the Lib Dems and one for the Conservatives.  If these results are repeated the Conservatives would lose everything they previously held (they are not defending their seats in Failsworth) but gain Saddleworth South from the Lib Dems, who would lose seven seats (all their seats in Oldham proper, Lees and Royton) to Labour.

The closest result last year was in Saddleworth North, which the Lib Dems held by just 0.6 points ahead of left-wing Independent parish councillor Ken Hulme.  Hulme is no longer with us and the local Lib Dems may be able to breathe more easily in this ward.  Neither of the other two Lib Dem wards last time out were particularly south; Shaw had a majority of 3.6 points over Labour and the majority in Crompton was 6.7 points.  The only Lib Dem losses which remain in the marginal column are Saddleworth West and Lees (Labour majority 4.5 points), and Waterhead in eastern Oldham (9.8 points).


ROCHDALE

Oldham may no longer have a railway bridge announcing it as the home of the tubular bandage, but Rochdale still has one announcing it as the home of the co-operative movement.  Rochdale has several other advantages over Oldham, including a rail link to the outside world and a beautiful Victorian town hall, which is so determinedly Gothic there is a long-running rumour that Hitler would have it rebuilt in Germany had he succesfully invaded Britain.  If Rochdale town hall can be summed up in the one word "Gothic", Oldham town hall can be summed up in the one word "derelict".

Now that I've got that out of my system, I can get on with describing the council, which in addition to Rochdale covers the town of Heywood to the west, the Manchester suburb of Middleton to the south-west, and the small Pennine towns of Milnrow and Littleborough to the east and Wardle up a blind valley to the north-east.

Rochdale is and always will be famous for its long-serving MP Sir Cyril Smith, and given the long-running third-party strength in the town it's something of a surprise to find that it took until 2007 for the Liberal Democrats to win a majority of the council; on the other hand given that the Lib Dems are weak in the Heywood and Middleton half of the borough perhaps this isn't so surprising.  Previously the council had generally alternated between Labour control and being hung, with a period of Conservative control from 1975 to 1978 to break that pattern.

Two years ago Gordon Brown came to Rochdale on the campaign trail and made the mistake of meeting Gillian Duffy and saying what he thought of her into an open microphone, resulting in a minor scandal inevitably dubbed 'Bigotgate'.  Rochdale at the time was a key marginal seat, having voted Lib Dem by 442 votes in 2005, and after Bigotgate the commentators wrote off Labour's chances of gaining the seat.  The commentators were wrong.  Not only did Labour gain the Rochdale parliamentary seat, they also gained three council seats from the Lib Dems, costing them their majority.  After that, the wheels came off the Lib Dem machine in Rochdale in spectacular fashion with an enormous split in the group and defections galore.  The result is that Labour are now back in overall control with 32 seats to 18 for the Conservatives and 10 for the Lib Dems.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/rochdale08.png]

The map of the 2008 results is reproduced here more for historical interest.  As in Oldham in 2008 so in Rochdale: the Lib Dems won 11 wards, Labour 5 and the Conservatives 4.  However, six Lib Dem councillors from that year have defected: the Castleton, Littleborough Lakeside, Milkstone and Deeplish, and Smallbridge and Firgrove councillors are now in the Conservatives and the North Heywood, and Spotland and Falinge councillors have gone to Labour, so the Lib Dems are defending 5 seats to 7 for Labour and 8 for the Conservatives.

This is actually a simplification, as at the 2011 elections several Lib Dem councillors stood for re-election under the label Independent Alliance.  The effect of all this on the electorate can be summarised by the 2011 map:

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/rochdale11.png]

Wipeout.  Fifteen seats for Labour and five for the Conservatives.  This wasn't enough at the time for Labour to take control but further defections since have given them an overall majority.

The closest the Lib Dems came to winning a seat last time was in Bamford, which the Conservatives gained by 1.8 points, and in Milnrow and Newhey, which Labour gained by 5.5 points.  This year the Conservatives are defending Bamford.  The Tory defector in Castleton isn't standing again and would probably have lost anyway, while the two Lib Dem to Labour defectors are also standing down.  The Tory defector with the best chance of holding on under his new colours is Peter Evans in Littleborough Lakeside, but the Tories won this by less than three points over Labour last year and the Lib Dems aren't standing here this year.  The other marginal ward on 2011 results is Healey, which the Lib Dems are defending but in which they were a poor third last year, the Conservatives winning by 3.7 points from Labour.


SALFORD

Declaration of interest: my mother works for Salford Council.

Salford these days has a lot of media interest, but that's because of the recent development of the TV and radio studios at Media City UK in the Quays rather than anything to do with the council.  Next door to Media City is the Lowry Centre, which is an excellent reason to visit the city.  The Quays have been well regenerated but there's still a long way to go to regenerate much of the rest of the city, and it's noticeable that a lot of BBC suits haven't moved up to Salford with their jobs.  Cowards.

Salford city council annexed a large area in 1974, including the towns of Eccles, Irlam, Pendlebury, Swinton and Worsley.  It has been consistently Labour-controlled since 1973, with the high-point for Labour being in 1996 when they won all 20 wards.  Since then the Conservatives, after being wiped out for much of the 1990s, have staged a recovery to become the official opposition with 11 seats, to 44 for Labour, 3 for the Lib Dems and 2 Independents.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/salford08.png]

The 2008 elections were Labour's recent low point as they won only ten seats.  Five seats were won by the Conservatives, four by the Liberal Democrats and one by the Wigan-based political group Community Action, who defeated the Roger Evans in Irlam ward over the issue of a proposed congestion charge for Greater Manchester; Evans was the chairman of the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive.  The Community Action councillor is now sitting as an independent, as is the Lib Dem councillor for Swinton South, so the seats being defended are ten Labour, five Conservative, three Lib Dem and two Independent.  Both the Independent councillors are standing down at this election.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/salford11.png]

The 2010 and 2011 results in Salford both resulted in Labour winning seventeen seats to three for the Conservatives (Boothstown and Ellenbrook, Walkden South and Worsley).  On the 2011 results no ward can reasonably be described as marginal so I would expect the same result this year.  The Lib Dems, whose wards were in inner Salford, are facing wipeout from the council.

More interesting will be Salford's first mayoral election, following a successful referendum in February.  The runaway favourite for this position is the Labour candidate, former MP Ian Stewart, who was forced to retire in 2010 after his Eccles constituency was abolished in boundary changes.  The Tories and Lib Dems have both selected their group leaders, Karen Garrido (up for re-election in Worsley) and Norman Owen (up for re-election in Claremont) respectively.  Also standing are Bernard Gill for UKIP, Joe O'Neill for the Green Party (who didn't read the rules on artwork for the mayoral address booklet and so isn't in there), Eddy O'Sullivan for the BNP, Mike Felse for the English Democrats (who wants to cut council tax in half), Michael Moulding for Community Action, and independent candidates Paul Massey (who is being investigated by police over allegations of money-laundering) and Pat Ward.  If you want to read the manifestos, they can be found online at <http://www.salford.gov.uk/d/Salford_mayor_election_booklet.pdf>


STOCKPORT

Off to the south-east of Greater Manchester and the last stop before Manchester for the London express trains is Stockport, the point at which the River Mersey begins at the confluence of the Rivers Goyt and Tame.  The Victorian Stockport Viaduct, the largest brick structure in western Europe, crosses the Mersey valley next to the Hat Works museum, which commemorates the now-dead hat-making industry in the town.  The current Stockport council also includes the towns of Bramhall, Bredbury, Cheatle, Gatley, Hazel Grove, Marple and Romiley.

Stockport is the only Greater Manchester council which has never been controlled by Labour.  It was Conservative from 1975 to 1983 and then hung continuously until 1999, when a progressive Conservative collapse allowed the Lib Dems to take overall control.  The Lib Dems fell back in 2000 but got overall control back in 2002 and held it until losing control last year.  The current composition of the council according to their website is 29 Lib Dems, 17 Labour, 12 Conservative, 3 Heald Green Ratepayers, 1 Independent and 1 'People Matter'.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/stockport08.png]

The 2008 results saw the Lib Dems win twelve seats to four each for the Conservatives and Labour and one for the Independent Ratepayers who have an iron grip on Heald Green ward.  Since 2008 the Lib Dem councillor in Brinnington and Central has gone Independent.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/stockport11.png]

Last year Labour and the Lib Dems won 8 wards each, the Conservatives won 4 wards and the Ratepayers held Heald Green.  The three main parties polled almost equal shares of the vote (Lab 31.6 C 30.2 LD 29.3).   If these results were repeated next year the Lib Dems would lose Bredbury Green and Romiley, and Hazel Grove to the Conservatives and Brinnington and Central, Davenport and Cale Green, and Manor to Labour but gain Cheadle and Gatley from the Conservatives.

On the 2011 results the Lib Dems are unlikely to hold on to Bredbury Green (C by 13.7 points) or Davenport (Lab by 33 points) and Labour are almost certain to pick up Brinnington and Central (70% Labour in 2011) from the Independent, who is not standing for re-election.  Cheadle and Gatley was the closest result of the 2011 election (LD by 1.7 points) and this time the Conservatives are defending the seat, unlike last year.  Hazel Grove last year was C by 2.6 points so could still be up in the air; Manor was Labour by 8 points so probably won't be.  Other wards in the marginal column are Bramhall North (C by 9.5 over LD), Cheadle Hulme South (LD by 7 over C), Heatons North (Lab by 7.7 over C), Marple North (LD by 7.4 over C), Marple South (LD by 9.9 over C), Offerton (LD by 5.3 over Lab) where the Leader of the Council Dave Goddard is up for re-election, and Stepping Hill (LD by 8.3 over C).


TAMESIDE

We move north from Stockport into a confusing agglomeration of mill towns to the east of Manchester along the old Lancashire/Cheshire border.  This is Tameside, named after the River Tame.  The council is based in Ashton-under-Lyne and the borough also includes Audenshaw, Denton, Droylsden, Dukinfield, Hyde and Stalybridge, together with the slightly detached towns of Mottram-in-Longdendale (home at different times to LS Lowry, the Moors Murderers and Harold Shipman) to the south-east and Mossley (the point where Cheshire, Lancashire and Yorkshire all met) to the north-east.

Tameside council has been strongly Labour ever since a controversial Conservative administration was voted out in 1979.  Labour won every ward in 1990 and repeated the trick in 1994.  The current composition is 48 Labour, 8 Conservative and one Independent.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/tameside08.png]

The 2008 results were the Conservatives' recent high-water mark on Tameside as they won five wards; Labour won thirteen wards and Mossley returned an independent associated with the parish council.  Since the election the Conservative councillor for Dukinfield-Stalybridge ward has defected to Labour, so the Conservatives are defending four seats.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/tameside11.png]

The 2011 results were rather simpler, the Conservatives holding Hyde Werneth and Stalybridge South and Labour winning everything else.  Stalybridge South is a safe Conservative ward, and Ashton Hurst and Stalybridge North were safe Labour last year, so the only real question from this election is whether Labour can gain Hyde Werneth (C by 3.3 last year).


TRAFFORD

Trafford.  Associated in the minds of one section of the population with the football and cricket grounds at Old Trafford, and in the minds of another section of the population with the enormous shopping mall of the Trafford Centre.  In July and August Old Trafford will host some of the matches in the London Olympic football tournament, which makes Trafford the only Olympic host borough in Greater Manchester.

The Trafford borough straddles the old Lancashire/Cheshire boundary, with the towns of Altrincham, Bowdon, Hale, Partington and Sale on the Cheshire side and Stretford and Urmston on the Lancashire side.  It is the only Greater Manchester borough under Conservative control.  Currently there are 37 Conservative councillors to 22 for Labour and 4 for the Lib Dems.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/trafford08.png]

In 2008 the Conservatives won 13 wards, Labour won 6 and the Lib Dems won 2.  Since then there have been no changes.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/trafford11.png]

The Conservative vote held up well in Trafford last year and they came out with 13 wards again, Labour winning the other 8.  If last year's results are repeated the Conservatives would gain the two Lib Dem wards (both in Altrincham) but lose Sale Moor and Urmston to Labour.  Last year Sale Moor was Labour by 7.4 points and Urmston by 9.4 points, so these look likely gains.  Timperley (C by 11.8 last year) looks like a pretty certain Conservative pickup but Village could be a lot tighter; it was Conservative last year by just 1.7 points.

The other wards in the marginal column based on the 2011 results are Broadheath ward in Sale (C by 2.8 over Labour), Davyhulme East (C by 9 over Lab) and Flixton (C by 7.7 over Lab).  If the Conservatives were to lose all of these and pick up neither of the Lib Dem wards they would still hold a majority of 1, so another two years of Conservative majority control looks a pretty certain bet.


WIGAN

Wigan stands apart rather from the rest of Greater Manchester, not just geographically but because of its industry; while the main industry of Greater Manchester was traditionally textiles, Wigan borough made its money from coal.  As a result much of the area is suffering from the usual problems of localities which have lost their main industry.  The Wigan borough includes a large number of such small towns outside Wigan itself: Abram, Ashton-in-Makerfield, Aspull, Atherton, Hindley, Ince-in-Makerfield, Leigh, Orrell, Standish, Tyldesley and Winstanley.

Perhaps not surprisingly, the council has been consistently Labour-controlled since it was created.  Labour managed a clean sweep of all 24 wards in 1996.  Currently the composition is 58 Labour to 8 Independents, 5 Conservatives, 2 Liberal Democrats, 1 Community Action and 1 Standish Independent.

[Map of 2008 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2008/wigan08.png]

2008 was the only election in the council's history in which Labour failed to win a majority of wards, winning 12 seats to six for the Conservatives, 2 Community Action, 1 Liberal Democrat and four Independents.  Since the election Labour have gained Wigan Central from the Conservatives in a by-election, and the Community Action councillor for Ashton has gone Independent, so Labour are defending 13 seats, the Conservatives their entire group of 5, Community Action 1, the Lib Dems 1 and Independents 5.

[Map of 2011 results: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/wigan11.png]

Since 2008 it has been mostly plain sailing for Labour in Wigan council elections; the party won every ward in 2010 with the exception of Tyldesley which the Lib Dems held, and in 2011 the party won everything except for four wards which elected independents - Atherton (the only ward Labour lost in the whole of Greater Manchester), Bryn, Hindley Green and Standish with Langtree (where the outgoing dissident Conservative councillor was re-elected under the label Standish Independent).  

The closest 2011 result was in Lowton East, which Labour gained from Community Action by 0.4 points over the Conservatives; the Conservatives are defending Lowton East this year and will have the benefit of incumbency.  Labour also gained Orrell from Conservatives by 3.5 points; at least this time the defending Tory councillor Richard Clayton doesn't have the disadvantage of his own son standing against him, as happened in 2008.  The Conservative group leader Sean Ell is standing down in Astley Mosley Common, which looks like a certain Labour gain.  Similarly the Conservatives look unlikely to hold in Shevington with Lower Ground or Standish with Langtree, where the popular Fairhurst family of ex-Conservative councillors split their vote.

The Lib Dems face an uphill battle to keep their seat in Tyldesley, which was Labour by 5.1 points last year.  The last Community Action seat is up in Winstanley, but they didn't stand there last year so it's not clear how well they will do.  One of the five independent councillors up for election (Bob Splaine in Atherton) is standing down; predicting how well the other four will do is a mug's game.



So, overall this is not likely to be a set of elections in Greater Manchester that will change much.  Labour already control eight of the ten boroughs, the Lib Dems are unlikely to gain overall control of Stockport back, and the Conservatives should easily keep their grip on Trafford.  The first Salford mayoral election and the Manchester mayoral referendum will probably provide the most interest.

We shall find out how much of what I've written is nonsense in the early hours of 4th May.  In the meantime you can download a full candidate list for Greater Manchester from <https://www.sugarsync.com/pf/D7011697_3174152_690283?directDownload=true>.

