SEFTON

RITA: I wouldn't go an' live in Formby.  I hate that hole, don't you?
FRANK: Yes.
RITA: Where do you live?
FRANK: Formby.
-Willy Russell, Educating Rita

INTRODUCTION

One question that probably needs answering before we go any further - where is Sefton?  There is a village called Sefton, but most people would be hard-pressed to place it on a map.  Yet there's a metropolitan borough named after it: this is one of those cases where a local government district contains so many different areas, all with competing identities and interests, that a neutral name no-one particularly likes is adopted as a compromise.  

Sefton is certainly one of the more diverse metropolitan boroughs.  At the southern end is the depressed town of Bootle, which became so rich thanks to the extensive docks on the Mersey estuary that it successfully fought off amalgamation with Liverpool.  Directly to the north of Bootle is the middle-class town of Crosby, probably best known for the art installation Another Place on the beach, while north-east of Bootle on the road to Ormskirk is the Liverpool dormitory town of Maghull (pronounced m'GULL).  The village of Sefton is just west of Maghull.

North of Crosby the borough hugs the coastal strip without going more than a few miles inland; since the coastline curves to the east this gives the borough a very weird shape.  After a few villages we reach Formby, another Liverpool commuter town, and then come to the affluent Victorian seaside resort of Southport, which would rather not have been in Merseyside in the first place.

The towns along the coast - Southport, Formby, Crosby and Bootle - are all linked to each other by the Southport branch of the Merseyrail Northern Line, with frequent electric trains to Liverpool Central.  Maghull is connected to Liverpool by the Ormskirk branch of the Northern Line.

PSEPHOLOGY

Politically, with all these diverse areas it might not be surprising to find that Sefton council is a hung council.  In fact it has been under no overall control for a very long time - since 1986, when the Conservatives lost their majority.  For most of the period since then the council has been run by an all-party coalition, with the Leader of the Council coming from the largest party on the council.  However, this year there is a good chance that Labour could take overall control of Sefton council for the first time ever.  This definitely makes Sefton one to watch on election night.

The general political pattern in Sefton up to 2008 can be grossly over-simplified like this: Southport is a Liberal Democrat town with a few Conservative wards, Formby votes Conservative, Maghull elects Lib Dem councillors, Bootle unsurprisingly is a Labour stronghold and all three parties have areas of strength in Crosby.

The three elections from 2006 to 2008 all produced the same result, the Liberal Democrats winning 9 seats to 7 for Labour and 6 for the Conservatives.  The map below shows the results in 2006 and 2007; in 2008 the Conservatives won Cambridge ward in Southport while the Liberal Democrats won Manor ward.

[LINK: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2006/sefton06.png]

In 2011 Labour made five gains, mostly from Lib Dem-held wards in Maghull and Crosby.  The Conservatives also gained a seat in Southport from the Liberal Democrats.  

[LINK: http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/2011/sefton11.png]

Since then the Conservative group on the council has suffered a major split, with four of their councillors walking off to become Independent Conservatives and a fifth going to UKIP.  The new UKIPper and one of the Indie Conservatives are up for re-election in May.

The current composition of the council is 28 Labour, 23 Lib Dems, 10 Conservatives, 4 Independent Conservatives and 1 UKIP.  Labour need to gain six seats for overall control of the council.

SOUTHPORT

As stated, at the northern end of the borough is the long seaside resort of Southport, which vies with Bootle for being the largest town in the borough.  The town is covered by seven wards (Ainsdale, Birkdale, Cambridge, Duke's, Kew, Meols and Norwood) which also form the Southport parliamentary constituency.  The borough boundary is mercilessly drawn to exclude all rural areas around the town - the graphic is rather misleading as most of the area of Cambridge ward in particular is Southport's ridiculously extensive beach.

The town's voting pattern is basically Liberal Democrat with some Conservative wards.  This is not a Labour area - Labour have never won the parliamentary seat (one of the candidates who tried was John Prescott in 1966, in his first election campaign), the party have not won a council seat in Southport for many years, and during the Brown years they were basically non-existent in the town.  However, Labour did stage a recovery in 2011 and have a shot at winning a couple of wards this time.  There is a localist movement - the Southport Party - which campaigns for Southport to be moved back into Lancashire; the party won Cambridge ward in 2002 but have had no success since, although Sandgrounders can still give the Southport Party respectable scores.  UKIP stood in all the wards last year and polled quite well, possibly thanks to the town's large retired population, so the town's politics is actually much more fragmented than might be expected - last year six of the seven wards were won with vote shares of less than 40% and the Lib Dems won three of their seats with less than a third of the vote.

AINSDALE is the southernmost ward and basically consists of the upmarket suburb of the same name.  It's normally a safe Conservative ward (67.8% Conservative in 2008) but was rather surprisingly gained by the Lib Dems in 2010.  The Lib Dems failed to repeat the trick last year (C 44% LD 26% Lab 18% UKIP 7%) and the Conservatives should be favourites to hold on.

North-east of Ainsdale is BIRKDALE ward, which is an entirely built up area east of the railway line (the Open Championship golf course is in Duke's ward).  This is again a mostly upmarket area, particularly the south-west of the ward around Hillside railway station, and is safe for the Liberal Democrats, although in 2011 they won the seat with just 34% of the vote, the Conservatives and Labour both polling over 20% with UKIP on 13% and the Southport Party on 8%.

The next ward to the north-east is KEW ward, around the cemetery and Scarisbrick New Road, which could be one to watch in May.  This is one of Southport's less well-off areas and the last four years have seen a spectacular recovery in the Labour vote, from 6.8% and fourth place in 2008 to 26.6% and second place in 2011.  This has turned the ward from safe Lib Dem into a Lib Dem/Labour marginal.  Last year's shares of the vote were LD 35% Lab 27% C 24% UKIP 15%.

Continuing north-east we come to NORWOOD ward, which covers the Blowick and High Park areas around Meols Cop railway station (which is on the Wigan-Southport line).  It is named after Norwood Road.  Similar comments apply here to Kew ward except that the Lib Dem majority last year was slightly smaller.  Labour didn't stand here in 2010 which makes comparisons fairly difficult, but came within 190 votes of winning last year (LD 32% Lab 26% C 18% Southport Party 16% UKIP 8%).  One factor which may make it difficult for Labour to gain in May is that the Lib Dem councillor up for re-election this year is Lord (Ronnie) Fearn, who has been on Sefton Council since the very beginning in 1973 and served two non-consecutive terms (1987-92 and 1997-2001) as MP for Southport.  Fearn is now 81; if he stands again he will be re-elected, if not the Lib Dems could have a fight on their hands.

MEOLS ward (pronounced Meals - this is a local word for the sand-dunes which Southport was built on) is the north-eastern end of town, the Churchtown and Crossens areas along the road to Preston.  This is again more middle-class and produced a very close result last year, the Lib Dems holding the seat by 75 votes from the Conservatives (LD 31% C 29% Lab 18% Southport Party 16% UKIP 7%).  The ward had been much safer for the Lib Dems in previous years.

Further into the town centre is the volatile CAMBRIDGE ward, named after Cambridge Road.  If the deprivation indices are to be believed, this is one of Southport's most socially divided areas, containing as it does the northern end of the Promenade with its hotels and boarding-houses where homeless people can be conveniently dumped.  This ward is a closely-fought Lib Dem/Conservative marginal, the Conservatives gaining the seat last May by just 16 votes (C 32.3% LD 31.9% Lab 18% Southport Party 11% UKIP 7%) to tip the balance of councillors here to 2-1 in the Tories' favour.  This year the Conservatives are on the defensive having won the ward in 2008; the councillor up for election is another of Sefton's Class of 1973, Thomas Glover.

Finally we come to DUKE'S ward, named after the town's founder William Sutton, a pub landlord from Churchtown who built the first seaside hotel in what was then called South Hawes, gaining for himself the epithet "Mad Duke" from the locals who all thought he was mad to build a hotel on sand dunes in the middle of nowhere.  The original hotel is still there at the south end of Lord Street, the main street through the town centre; there is a persistent story that the boulevards of Paris were inspired by Lord Street, Louis-Napoleon having been exiled to Southport in the 1840s.

Again, if the deprivation indices are to be believed, Duke's is a starkly divided ward, with the census area covering the town centre (at the north end of the ward) in the 7% most deprived and the one covering the Royal Birkdale golf course (at the south end) in the 15% least deprived.  Despite this, Duke's was last year the only ward in Southport with a full slate of Conservative councillors; however this didn't last for long as David Pearson, who is up for election in May, is one of the councillors who has gone Independent Conservative.  This is not by any means a safe Conservative ward (shares of the vote last year were C 38% LD 30% Lab 15% Southport Party 10% UKIP 8%) and if Pearson stands for re-election under his new colours pretty much anything could happen.

FORMBY

Driving south down the A565 from Southport, after leaving Ainsdale one passes RAF Woodvale on the right and then arrives on the edge of the town of Formby, located in more sand-dunes and woodland (one of the last refuges of the endangered red squirrel) behind the promontory of Formby Point.  Formby is a resolutely affluent, middle-class town and is notorious for its Millionaire's Row, home to several Liverpool and Everton football players and other members of the Merseyside great and good.  Much of the town is below sea level, so if the sea ever breaks through the sand dunes there could be trouble.

The town has two electoral wards, Harington covering the west of the town and Ravenmeols covering the east of the town.

HARINGTON ward (named after Harington Road) is the safest Conservative ward in Sefton; the Conservatives polled 68% here in 2008 and in 2011 still enjoyed a 24-point majority (C 57% Lab 33% LD 11%).  This is the ward that contains Millionaire's Row and all the forest and sand-dunes.  Nevertheless the Tories are having a lot of internal problems - the councillor up for election this year, Alf Doran, has defected to UKIP, while Gillian Cuthbertson, who was re-elected last year, is now an Independent Conservative.  The last time UKIP stood here (in 2010) they polled just 4%, so Doran will be relying on any personal vote he may have in order to be re-elected.  The fate of the last Conservative defector here is not grounds for optimism for Doran - Eric Storey stood as an independent in 2010 after being deselected by the Conservatives following 52 years on Formby UDC and Sefton MBC (on the grounds that he was 91), and came fourth with 9% of the vote.

RAVENMEOLS ward combines the eastern, and only slightly less upmarket, part of Formby with the villages of Little Altcar and Ince Blundell to the south.  This ward was safe Conservative during the Blair and Brown years; indeed Labour had won it only once, in 1995, but Labour reduced the Conservative majority to 176 votes in 2010 and followed up last year by squeezing the Lib Dem vote to gain the ward by just 58 votes (Lab 45% C 43% LD 7% Grn 5%); the Tory candidate was local radio and former shopping TV presenter Debi Jones who had failed to gain the parliamentary seat of Sefton Central the previous year.  Labour will be hoping to make it two out of three in Ravenmeols this year.

CROSBY

Crosby is basically the northern end of the Liverpool conurbation.  It's a suburban and rather socially mixed area with pockets of support for all the main parties.  The town is divided into four wards: Manor, Blundellsands, Victoria and Church.

MANOR ward is the northernmost ward, covering the north-eastern edge of the town together with the parish of Thornton to the north-east, the village of Little Crosby to the north and the rather isolated community of Hightown on the coast.  It is named after Crosby Hall, which is located in Little Crosby.  Socially Hightown and Thornton are well-off while the parts of Crosby proper in the ward are more of a muchness.  Politically Manor is a rather volatile ward, having voted for all three parties in recent years: it split 2Lab/1C in 2004, the Conservatives gained the second Labour seat in 2006, held the ward in 2007, gained the remamining Labour seat at an October 2007 by-election, but then lost their three seats to the Lib Dems in 2008 and to Labour in 2010 and 2011.  This year the Lib Dem seat is up and given the shares of the vote last year (Lab 54% C 36% LD 11%) a Labour gain looks pretty certain.

Further into the town along the Liverpool Road is VICTORIA ward, an entirely built-up ward which covers the Great Crosby area and is named after Victoria Park.  This was a long-standing Lib Dem ward up to 2011, often with very large majorities, but the Lib Dem majority was cut to under 200 in 2010 and Labour made a very easy gain in May with their candidate Les Byrom, the former Tory leader of the council who had defected to Labour.  The scale of Byrom's win (Lab 50% LD 32% C 13% UKIP 6%) again makes it difficult to bet against a Labour pick-up in May.

The southern end of Crosby - Seaforth and Waterloo - is covered by CHURCH ward.  This is where the beach ends and the docks start - part of Seaforth Container Terminal is within the ward.  This is by far the most deprived area of Crosby and very similar to Bootle just to the south.  It also has voting patterns to match, being a very safe Labour ward (Lab 73% C 15% LD 8% last year).  The Lib Dems did win all three seats here in 2004 when the ward was redrawn, but failed to defend any of them.

This leaves the main coastal ward of BLUNDELLSANDS, the home of "Another Place", the statues on Crosby beach erected by Anthony Gormley.  Blundellsands has a reputation for being very well-off with lots of large, expensive houses.    For much of that time this has been reflected in being a super-safe Conservative ward which even at the Tory nadir in 1995 was not seriously challenged.  It took until 2010 for the ward to become marginal, when Labour put some effort in to their campaign here and were rewarded by cutting the Conservative majority to 85 votes.  A year of further campaigning by the same candidate resulted in another photo-finish, the Conservatives winning this time by 21 votes (C 43.5% Lab 43.0% LD 7% Grn 7%).  This ward has not escaped the cuts, the Liverpool Crosby coastguard station having recently been closed.

BOOTLE

Bootle, as stated, is a depressed former docks town which is one of the poorest areas in the country.  Despite job-creation schemes such as several government departments (including the former Girobank) being located there, the vast majority of the town's census areas are within the 20% most deprived in England, and there isn't much prospect of that changing.  Effectively the town is a Liverpool suburb, and it can be very difficult to tell where Bootle ends and Liverpool begins.

There are six wards covering the town: LINACRE is the docklands ward containing the town hall and the New Strand shopping centre; DERBY ward further up the hill to the east, containing the government buildings, is named after Derby Park, which itself is named after the Earls of Derby who owned so much land in Lancashire they were known as the uncrowned kings of the county; LITHERLAND, NETHERTON AND ORRELL, FORD and ST OSWALD wards cover suburban areas to the north-east as far as the M57/M58 junction at Switch Island.

To be honest, the politics of Bootle's wards doesn't call for much comment, in that they are without exception Labour strongholds of such strength that it can be can be difficult to find a non-Labour voter.  In 2011 the lowest Labour share of the vote was 75% in Netherton and Orrell and the highest was 89% in St Oswald; the only non-Labour candidate to crack 10% of the vote was the UKIP candidate in Derby ward, who polled 15%.  Bootle has a very active UKIP branch led by Paul Nuttall MEP, who stood in Derby ward in 2008 (before his election to the European Parliament) and polled 38%, almost making a Bootle ward look marginal.  

Chalk up six Labour seats for May, then.

MAGHULL

Maghull sticks out a little bit among Sefton's towns for one reason: it's not on the coast.  It's a dormitory town for Liverpool on the A59 Liverpool-Ormskirk road, almost entirely developed in the 20th century, which once had the distinction of being England's largest civil parish.  Maghull and the surrounding parishes are divided into three wards: Molyneux, Park and Sudell, which have traditionally been dominated by the Liberal Democrats.

The MOLYNEUX ward doesn't actually contain much of Maghull itself, just a small portion of the southern end of the town.  Most of the ward's population is contained in the Aintree Village parish (this is the ward that contains the famous Aintree racecourse) and Melling parish on the other side of the M57 motorway; Melling parish includes the Kirkby overspill area of Waddicar together with Ashworth Hospital, a high-security psychiatric unit treating some of Britain's most notorious prisoners.  The ward is named after Sir Richard Molyneux, lord of the manor of Melling in the late 16th century.

Liverpool, Knowsley and St Helens have seen the formation of the Conservative/Lib Dem coalition precipitate an enormous collapse in the Liberal Democrat vote, and Maghull is the most obvious case of this phenomenon happening in Sefton district (Bootle never had much of a Lib Dem vote to start with).  So it has happened in Molyneux ward, which was 48% Lib Dem to 19% Labour in 2008, but was convincingly gained by Labour in 2010 and 2011, the shares of the vote in May being 58% for Labour to 23% for the Lib Dems (C 10% UKIP 9%), a complete turnaround.  Only a fool would bet against Labour making it 3 out of 3 in Molyneux this year.

SUDELL ward, which contains the centre and east of Maghull, is traditionally even more of a Lib Dem stronghold, having been won by the yellow party eve
ry time since the mid-1980s except for 1990 when Labour won.  In 2008 the Lib Dems had 52% of the vote and Labour were in third place with 16%; Labour turned it around to come within 130 votes in 2010 and won the ward in 2011, for the first time in twenty-one years, by the amazing margin of 53-27 (with the Tories on 16%).

Labour have not yet cracked PARK ward, which contains the west of Maghull together with the villages of Lydiate to the north and Sefton itself to the west.  However, they came close in May last year, finishing 69 votes behind a strong Lib Dem candidate - the Leader of the Council, who had done the chicken run from Molyneux ward.  Shares of the vote last year were LD 37% Lab 36% C 22%.

PROSPECTS

As stated at the beginning, Labour require six gains to take overall control of Sefton for the first time, and they have all the upside as they are defending none of the split wards.  
Simply repeating last year's results would deliver five Labour gains (Ravenmeols from the Conservatives, and Manor, Molyneux, Sudell and Victoria from the Liberal Democrats) and give them half of the seats.  All of those wards except Ravenmeols had majorities last year which make it very hard to bet against a further Labour gain.  Labour will also have their eye on taking Park ward from the Lib Dems and Blundellsands from the Conservatives, while Kew and Norwood wards in Southport are slightly more difficult targets.  The Tories will want to take back the defectors' seats in Duke's and Harington, while the Lib Dems have an opportunity to gain a seat from the Conservatives in the perpetually-marginal Cambridge ward.

So for Labour to take overall control they need to take all the near-certain gains (Manor, Molyneux, Sudell and Victoria) and two of the three tossup wards (Blundellsands, Park and Ravenmeols).  In Ravenmeols they will be helped by the fact that the Formby Conservatives will have their hands full getting a safe ward back off a defector, while in Park the fact that the defending Lib Dem candidate is not the council leader this time may run either way.  Blundellsands is the most marginal of the lot but may be a tougher nut to crack for the simple reason that it's the only seat the Crosby branch of the Tories have to worry about.

So, who knows what will happen?  We'll find out when polls close at 10pm on Thursday 3rd May.