There are just two by-elections on 6th November, one in Warwickshire and one in Cornwall which will be covered on Cornish Elections.  (That low number is good news for your columnist who is still recovering from a long weekend in Bucharest [Kris: could you please put a link in here to http://www.europeanquizzingchampionships.com/; thanks].)  Both are the result of elected councillors moving on to take up new jobs.

The six-month rule comes into effect this week: as of Friday there will be less than six months to go to the 2015 local elections on 7th May.  From then on, any new vacancies in seats which will be up for election in 2015 will not be filled; as most English councils will have whole council elections next year this means there will be relatively few by-elections until then.


BILTON, Rugby district council, Warwickshire; caused by the resignation of the leader of the council, Conservative councillor Craig Humphrey, who has a new job as managing director of the Coventry and Warwickshire Clearing House.

The Bilton area is an old village in western Rugby which has become absorbed into the town.  Here can be found the Rugby High School (not the famous public school but a girls' grammar school) together with some very expensive housing.  This is one of the most desirable areas in Rugby and its demographic profile is determinedly middle-class.

It's not surprising, therefore, to find that the Bilton ward is safe Conservative.  Rugby was re-warded in 2012 which makes comparisons difficult, but the 2002-2012 version of Bilton ward returned Tories at every election, and the ward actually swung towards the Conservatives between 2012 and 2014.  There are no implications for control of the council, which has a small Conservative majority.

The defending Conservative candidate is library volunteer Julie A'Barrow, who stood in the neighbouring ward of Rokeby and Overslade (a three-way marginal) in May this year and heavily lost a Tory seat to the Lib Dems.  She should have fewer problems here.  Labour have selected John Wells, a former Warwickshire county councillor.  Also standing are the Greens' Kate Crowley; the Lib Dems' Lesley George who, like Crowley, fought the ward in May; Pete McLaren for the Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition; the ward's first UKIP candidate Gordon Davies; and independent John Herman.

Parliamentary constituency: Rugby
Warwickshire county council division: Caldecott (most), Admirals (small part), Lawford and New Bilton (small part)
ONS Travel to Work Area: Rugby

May 2014 result C 1187 Lab 468 Grn 220 LD 207 TUSC 107
May 2012 result C 1134/1004/968 Lab 643 LD 397/373 TUSC 299

Julie Beverley A'BARROW, 49 Wordsworth Road, Rugby CV22 6HZ [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Kate CROWLEY, 24 Hillary Road, Rugby CV22 6EU [Green Party]
Gordon DAVIES, The Factory, Dares Walk, Hinckley LE10 1PZ [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Lesley Mary GEORGE, 208 Montague Road, Rugby CV22 6LG [Liberal Democrats]
John HERMAN, Two Trees, Lilbourne Road, Clifton upon Dunsmore, Rugby CV23 0BB [Independent]
Pete McLAREN, 32 The Green, Long Lawford, Rugby CV23 9BL [Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition]
John WELLS, 1 Cheshire Close, Rugby CV22 7JU [Labour Party Candidate]


MEVAGISSEY, Cornwall council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Michael Bunney, who is now employed by the council as a schoolteacher.

Here we have one of those picture-postcard fishing villages which Cornwall specialises in. There are still fishermen at Mevagissey, but the economy of this village, on the south coast five miles south of St Austell, is based on tourism; as well as the harbour itself, part of the Heligan estate, with its restored Victorian garden, is within the division.  To the north the division includes the recently-created Pentewan Valley parish, which runs almost to the edge of St Austell and includes the intriguingly-named village of London Apprentice; and to the south is St Goran parish, whose largest village is the harbour of Gorran Haven.

Mevagissey unexpectedly voted Labour in 2013 in a close three-way result; Labour polled 30% of the vote with UKIP second on 28%, the Conservatives third on 24% and the Lib Dems also polling creditably with 14%.  The previous Mevagissey division (boundary changes in 2009 removed part of St Austell Bay parish) was a close Tory/Lib Dem marginal in 2009, and the electoral units which covered the area before the creation of the unitary Cornwall council also tended to be close fights between the Tories and Lib Dems.

The defending Labour candidate is Gorran Haven resident Charmain Nicholas, a nurse specialising in adult safeguarding.  The UKIP and Conservative candidates from last year are standing again; they are Michael Williams (from Gorran Haven) and James Mustoe (from St Austell, a staffer for the local Tory MP) respectively.  The Lib Dem candidate is Chris Maynard, an environmental campaigner and scout group leader from St Austell, while the Greens' Katherine Moseley again completes the ballot paper.

May 2013 result Lab 391 UKIP 363 C 316 LD 184 Grn 62

Parliamentary constituency: St Austell and Newquay
Constituent parishes: Mevagissey, Pentewan Valley, St Goran
ONS Travel to Work Area: St Austell

Christopher Stewart MAYNARD, 5 Clarence Road, St Austell PL25 5NJ [Liberal Democrat]
Katherine Elizabeth MOSELEY, 1 Mitchell's Boatyard, Portmellon, Mevagissey, St Austell PL26 6PX [The Green Party]
James MUSTOE, 6 Trevorder Drive, St Austell PL25 3QR [Conservative Party Candidate]
Charmain Louise NICHOLAS, 27 Perhaver Park, Gorran Haven PL26 6NZ [Labour Party Candidate]
Michael WILLIAMS, Rossville, Quilver Close, Foxhole Lane, Gorran Haven, St Austell PL26 6JP [UK Independence Party]