By-elections on 9th October 2014.

CLACTON, House of Commons; caused by the resignation of Conservative MP Douglas Carswell, in order to seek re-election as a UKIP candidate; and BRIGHTLINGSEA, Essex county council; caused by the resignation of UKIP councillor Roger Lord.

(I am very grateful to "East Anglian Lefty" for extensive help with this preview, particularly in the Brightlingsea section.  East Anglian Lefty is the son of the Labour candidate in the Brightlingsea by-election.)

"Harwich for the continent, Frinton for the incontinent"
	- graffito at Liverpool Street station, London

There's been a noticeable trend in recent years for the party conference season to move away from the seaside.  This year Labour held their conference in Manchester, the Tories were in Birmingham and the Lib Dems are in Glasgow this week.  However, there is one thing which has brought most of the political campaigners in East Anglia to the seaside resort of Clacton in this year's conference season: a sensational by-election in north-east Essex that could end up making a bit of history.

The constituency based on north-east Essex has traditionally been known as Harwich.  In 1918, the first election in which women had the vote, it re-elected Maj Harry Newton as a Coalition Conservative; Newton, a barrister and Boer War veteran, had taken over the seat in 1910.  Newton stood down in 1922 and the Conservatives lost Harwich to the Liberals, the victorious candidate being chocolate manufacturer Albert Hillary.  Hillary increased his majority in 1923, but with the Liberals in decline at the following year's election he lost his seat back to the Tories' Sir Frederick Rice.  Rice served just one term before standing down in 1929, and the Liberals came back with John Pybus, former chairman of English Electric, gaining the seat.

The 1929 election resulted in Ramsay MacDonald coming to power at the head of the second Labour government; however, Labour lacked a majority in Parliament and initially relied on the support of the Liberals.  This led to a split in the Liberal Party over the issue of free trade and protectionism, with a breakaway group in favour of protectionism forming the Liberal National Party under Sir John Simon.  Pybus joined the Liberal Nationals group and was appointed Minister for Transport in the National Government.  He was re-elected in 1931 under his new colours, without Conservative opposition, but failed to finish his second term, dying shortly before the 1935 election.

The National Liberals had no trouble holding Harwich in 1935 under their new candidate Stanley Holmes, a chartered accountant who had served as Liberal MP for North East Derbyshire from 1918 to 1922.  Holmes held the seat with few problems until his elevation to the peerage (as Lord Dovercourt) in 1954; he was never opposed by the Conservatives and by 1950 the National Liberals were formally allied with the Conservatives.

Holmes' elevation to the peerage resulted in a by-election in Harwich in 1954.  The new National Liberal and Conservative candidate was Julian Ridsdale, a nephew of Stanley Baldwin who had served as a military intelligence officer in Japan during the Second World War; by now he was running a fruit farm in Sussex.  Ridsdale's wife Paddy had been a secretary to Ian Fleming during the war, and was rumoured to be the inspiration for a character called Miss Moneypenny in Fleming's hit book Casino Royale which had been published the previous year.  Ridsdale was up against Labour, who by now had emerged as the main challengers to the National Liberals and had cut their majority to 11 points in the 1945 election.  Fighting her first election campaign, the Labour candidate was a 23-year-old journalist called Shirley Catlin, fresh out of university where she had been the first woman to chair the Oxford University Labour Club.  We know her today as Shirley Williams.  Ridsdale won the by-election by 59% to 41%, starting off a long Parliamentary career which lasted until his retirement in 1992, when he passed the seat on to Iain Sproat.  A journalist and publisher, Sproat had previously served three terms as Conservative MP for Aberdeen South before a chicken-run in 1983 to what he thought was a safer seat in the Borders went horribly wrong.  

Sproat's fourth term in Parliament saw him appointed to the Major government, in which he served for four years as minister for sport.  But as it turned out, Sproat only had one term as MP for Harwich; in 1997 he became one of a large number of ministers to lose their seats in the Labour landslide, Ivan Henderson making one of the most unlikely Labour gains of all with a majority of 1,216, to become the first, and so far only, Labour MP for Harwich.  A stevedore and trade union official at the port of Harwich, Henderson even managed to increase his majority in the 2001 election in a rematch with Sproat, but couldn't hold back the returning Tory tide in 2005 and lost his seat to new Tory candidate Douglas Carswell. 

The son of two medical doctors, Carswell had grown up in Africa, where his father diagnosed Uganda's first case of AIDS in the 1980s; after graduating in history from UEA and King's College London, he had worked in TV broadcasting in Italy and, after being the Tory sacrificial lamb against Tony Blair in Sedgefield in 2001, in the Tory party's policy unit.  In Parliament, Carswell emerged as a campaigner on traditional Conservative values, radical political reform (he was the only Conservative MP to support proportional representation) and withdrawal from the European Union.

Carswell's position in parliament was greatly enhanced in 2010 by the Boundary Commission, which undertook a radical redrawing of the constituencies in northern Essex in order to allow for an eighteenth seat for the county.  The physical effect of this was to remove the port of Harwich from the seat which bore its name and transfer it to the North Essex constituency; the political effect was to greatly increase the Conservative majority in the rump Harwich constituency, which was renamed Clacton after its main town.  This increase came about because Harwich is a major port, with regular passenger ferry services over the North Sea to the Hook of Holland (the Esbjerg ferry has just been discontinued), and has a large number of Labour voters.  Ivan Henderson did try to get his seat back in 2010, but without his Harwich powerbase (he is now the town's county councillor) lost badly.

Without Harwich in the Clacton seat, what you got left?  An awful lot of pensioners, that's what.  About half of the Clacton constituency consists of the town of Clacton-on-Sea, a traditional and slightly depressed seaside resort.  To the east of Clacton are the elderly Holland-on-Sea, once home of the singer Sade; Frinton-on-Sea, one of the most well-known retirement ghettos in England (this is a place which protested against the recent removal of the town's level crossing gates); and Walton on the Naze, a small seaside resort.  Inland are a series of villages including Thorpe-le-Soken, whose name commemorates an ecclesiastical peculiar of times past; Weeley, once known for its music festival; and Great Clacton, both distinct and indistinguishable from Clacton town.  To the west of Clacton-on-Sea is Jaywick, part of which (the Brooklands Estate) is famous for being the sub-area at the very bottom of the Governemnt's indices of multiple deprivation; possibly not what the Times foresaw in 1871 when it wrote about Clacton "there will be no slums, nor do any object that can offend the eye".  The Times was referring to what was effectively the opening of Clacton-on-Sea, which owes its entire existence to the vision of Peter Bruff, a nineteenth-century railway engineer and entrepreneur who is almost single-handedly responsible for the town's development.

Peter Bruff's name is commemorated in one of Clacton's electoral wards.  The town is the administrative centre for Tendring district council, one of the more interesting councils when election time comes round because of the wide range of localist parties that stand.  Tendring's last ordinary election was in May 2011; as can be seen from the map 
	[Kris: please insert around here the relevant Map] 
the Tories cleaned up in Frinton and Walton, Holland-on-Sea was dominated by a local residents' party, the inland areas mostly elected independents while Clacton mostly elected Tory councillors, although Labour can win in the grottier areas of town (such as Golf Green ward, which includes Jaywick).  In 2012 the Holland-on-Sea Residents Association held two by-elections in St Bartholomews ward.  

The district as a whole most recently went to the polls in the Essex county council election of May 2013.  By this point UKIP were taking local elections very seriously.  The Tories held Frinton and Walton and two of the three divisions covering Clacton town, but lost Clacton East to the localist group Tendring First and the two divisions covering the rural part of the constituency to UKIP, although only about half of Tendring Rural East division and one-sixth of Brightlingsea division is within the constituency boundary.  The Tories and UKIP were both in contention throughout the constituency and scores were low; the highest winning share of the vote was 38% for the Tories in Clacton West (to 31% for UKIP), while Clacton North was won by the Tories with just 29% of the vote, Labour and UKIP polling 25% each.  The Conservatives were actually pushed down to third place in Brightlingsea with 25%; UKIP won with 30% and the Lib Dems were runners-up on 27%.  In the seventeen months since then there have been three district council by-elections in wards within Clacton town, all of which were held by the Conservatives.

For students of the Second World War, the name "Jaywick" may conjure up not an image of a modern-day Essex slum on the edge of Clacton but a memory of an Australian/British special forces operation in 1943 to raid Japanese shipping in Singapore harbour.  It worked because the enemy were taken completely by surprise.  While there have been signs of a Eurosceptic vote in this corner of Essex for a long time (the old Harwich seat saw the best score for the short-lived Referendum Party in 1997, and UKIP saved their deposit in 2001), nobody foresaw Douglas Carswell's defection to UKIP and wish to seek re-election as a UKIP candidate.  Not David Cameron, who wasn't informed in advance; not the Tory whips, who would undoubtedly have squashed the idea; and certainly not UKIP's county councillor for Brightlingsea Roger Lord, a former Tory figure who had already been selected as UKIP's PPC for Clacton.  In the ensuing fallout Lord resigned from Essex county council to force a by-election of his own, in which he has endorsed the Liberal Democrats.  This is better than fiction; you can't make this sort of thing up and expect to be believed.

	[Kris: can you put in at this point the Banksy mural that went up in Clacton last week?  Thanks]

Carswell will appear at the top of the ballot paper for this increasingly bizarre by-election thanks to John Black, who was to stand as the candidate of the Scottish Jacobite Party, failing to correctly fill out his nomination papers.  While there were rumours that the Mayor of London Boris Johnson would throw his hat into the ring, the official Conservative candidate is Giles Watling, who as well as being a district councillor for Frinton-on-Sea is an actor probably best known for the role of Oswald in the TV series Bread.  (Again, you can't make this up.)  Labour have selected Tim Young, a Colchester borough councillor.  The Lib Dem candidate is another actor, former mayor of Bishop's Stortford and former East Hertfordshire district councillor Andy Graham, who gives an address in Oxfordshire.  The Greens have reselected Chris Southall, who fought the seat in 2010.  Also standing are the Monster Raving Loony Party's Howling Laud Hope and two independent candidates: Charlotte Rose is a "high class courtesan" (ahem) from London, while Bruze Sizer is an oncologist at Colchester Hospital who is standing on the single issue of health and cancer care.

With such a high profile being given to the parliamentary by-election, the Essex county council by-election has been rather overlooked.  This is the for the division of Brightlingsea, which covers the south-east of the Tendring peninsula and is made up of the eponymous town and four nearby parishes. Brightlingsea grew up as a fishing port, taking advantage of the rich oyster fisheries around the mouth of the Colne; in the Middle Ages it became a Limb of Sandwich, making it the only part of the Cinque Ports confederation outside Kent and Sussex. Latterly boat-building became an important employer in the town, and the port came to prominence again in the 1980s and 1990s when attempts were made respectively to import coal and export live animals through it. The decline of the town's heritage to become more of a dormitory town for Colchester is marked by the recent construction of a marina over the old dock buildings.

	[Insert indicative Brightlingsea picture here]

Look on a map and you might get the suspicion that Brightlingsea was once an island; look at the town's etymology and that suspicion will be confirmed, as the name means something like 'island of the descendants of Berhtel', although the dozens of different spellings the place has had over recorded history serve to confuse rather than illuminate the issue. Brightlingsea wasn't connected to the mainland until the 16th century and there is still only one narrow road in or out. Whilst many of the complaints about the town's insularity are the standard intra-village rivalry you'll get anywhere, amongst the older generation in Brightlingsea you can still find people who've never been beyond Colchester, and some who've never even been that far. Nevertheless, as the largest settlement between Wivenhoe and Clacton, it does act as a local centre and its here that the local secondary school, the Colne Community College, is located.

Head from the parish church out of town, and you'll find yourself on the Brightlingsea road going towards Thorrington Cross (look out for the preserved tide mill on your left). Thorrington is unusual in that it's not a particularly nucleated village, but instead has most of its population spread out along each of the four roads heading away from the Cross. Each one of these branches heads towards another parish in the division; take the road north-east along the B1027 and you'll come to Alresford. The name is derived from a ford over Alresford Creek (now so silted up as to be uncrossable), but these days the population is concentrated half a mile up the road, around the railway station (Alresford is on the Essex Sunshine Coast branch line). The bulk of the village was built in the early 1960s on the orchards which historically were Alresford's economic basis. These days the dwellers in the village's pleasant bungalows are (if not retired) more likely to work in Colchester, although some employment is also provided by the sand and gravel quarries which surround the village.

One stop further by train from Alresford, or along Station Road from Thorrington, and you'll come to Great Bentley. Unlike some other entrants in this column, Great Bentley doesn't claim to be Britain's largest village, but it does claim to have its largest green. Also in the parish but on the other side of the railway and half a mile down the road is Aingers Green, a mid-20th century development seemingly intended specifically for people moving out from London.

If you follow the B1027 from Thorrington westwards towards Clacton, you'll come to the parish of St Osyth, which like Great Bentley contains two main settlements. St Osyth is a desirable village named after an Anglo-Saxon saint with a decidedly anachronistic life story. A priory sits near the village's centre, but is sadly inaccessible to the public due to a long-running planning dispute. To the west across St Osyth Creek is Point Clear, an isolated community at the mouth of the River Colne which is during the summer connected to Brightlingsea by a foot ferry. A significant proportion of the parish's population lives in static caravan parks, most notably in Point Clear Bay and in Seawick, just down the coast from Jaywick.

St Osyth parish is in the Clacton constituency and is covered by a two-member district ward of the same name, which is the only area which will go to the polls in both by-elections. Currently it is represented by two independents, although in 2007 the Conservatives took one of the seats by a single vote. The rest of the division falls within the Harwich and North Essex constituency. Alresford and Great Bentley are both single member wards, with the former held by the Liberal Democrats and the latter by the Conservatives. Thorrington is part of the concisely-named two-member Thorrington, Frating, Elmstead and Great Bromley ward, which is safely Conservative. Brightlingsea is Tendring's only three-member ward and returns two independents and one Conservative, who beat the alphabet to obtain more than double the votes of one of his running mates. Clearly a place that votes for the person rather than the party.

The Brightlingsea division was held for many years by the Conservatives, but after the incumbent retired in 2013 it was narrowly won by UKIP's Roger Lord, with the Lib Dems (as stated above) just pipping the Conservatives to second.

Five candidates are standing in the Brightlingsea by-election. Defending for UKIP is Anne Poonian, secretary of the Clacton branch. She gives an address in Frinton, on the other side of Clacton from the division. The Conservative candidate is Alan Goggin, district councillor for Brightlingsea and cabinet member for finance on Tendring district council. Standing for (I think) the fifth time is Gary Scott, the Lib Dem district councillor for Alresford, who clearly has a strong personal vote in that village; he is the election agent for the Colchester MP Bob Russell. The Labour candidate is Carol Carlsson Browne, an Alresford resident and recently-retired headteacher. The Greens fill out the ballot paper, standing Brightlingsea resident Beverley Maltby.  Although it's bound to be overshadowed by the parliamentary by-election, there'll be plenty of worried faces at the Brightlingsea count which will take place on Friday morning: the Tories will be hoping to recover a seat they never expected to lose and to show they can beat back the UKIP juggernaut; UKIP will want to show they aren't just a flash in the pan; and if either Labour or the Lib Dems win they would then become the leader of the opposition at County Hall, with all that implies.

In the wider Clacton constituency, two opinion polls taken in the immediate aftermath of Carswell's defection both showed him well ahead, and the election-data blog <http://election-data.blogspot.co.uk/2014/08/clacton.html> (whose author, like all good psephologists, is a Boltonian) has a good analysis of how Clacton's elderly demographic is particularly friendly to UKIP.  Nonetheless, it is now over thirty years since the Mitcham and Morden by-election of 1982, the last time in which a defector to a new party immediately resigned to seek re-election, and Bruce Douglas-Mann (the defector in that case) lost.  We shall see on Friday morning whether Carswell's decision to join a new party has come at the cost of his job; or whether he has become the first member of the UK Independence Party to be elected to the House of Commons on that ticket.

Clacton
Douglas Carswell (UKIP)
Andy Graham (LD)
Howling Laud Hope (Loony)
Charlotte Rose (Ind)
Bruce Sizer (Ind)
Chris Southall (Grn)
Giles Watling (C)
Tim Young (Lab)

May 2010 result C 22867 Lab 10799 LD 5577 BNP 1975 Tendring First 1078 Grn 535 Ind 292

John BLACK, 6 Woodhollow House, Maclachlan Road, Helensburgh G84 9BT [Scottish Jacobite Party] - NOMINATION REJECTED, PAPER NOT SUBSCRIBED AS REQUIRED
Douglas CARSWELL, Manor Lodge Cottage, Crow Lane, Tendring, Clacton-on-Sea CO16 9AP [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Andy GRAHAM, Stable Yard Flat, Chipping Norton Road, Churchill, Chipping Norton OX7 6NG [Liberal Democrats]
Howling Laud HOPE, 59 New Barn Close, Fleet GU51 5HU [The Official Monster Raving Loony Party]
Charlotte ROSE, address in the Poplar and Limehouse constituency [Independent]
Bruce Francis SIZER, address in the Ipswich constituency [Independent]
Chris SOUTHALL, 193 Burrs Road, Clacton-on-Sea CO15 4LN [Green Party]
Giles WATLING, 15 Holmbrook Way, Frinton-on-Sea CO13 9LN [Conservative Party Candidate]
Tim YOUNG, 34 Mascot Square, Colchester CO4 3GA [Labour Party]

Brightlingsea
Carol Carlsson Browne (Lab)
Alan Goggin (C)
Beverley Maltby (Grn)
Anne Poonian (UKIP)
Gary Scott (LD)

May 2013 result UKIP 1429 LD 1264 C 1156 Lab 585 Grn 165 Tendring First 102
June 2009 result C 2387 LD 1577 Lab 588 BNP 537 Grn 468
May 2005 result C 4157 Lab 2327 LD 2258 Grn 478

Carol Wendy CARLSSON BROWNE, Leander House, St Andrews Close, Alresford, Colchester CO7 8BL [Labour Party Candidate]
Alan GOGGIN, Freshfields, Church Road, Brightlingsea CO7 0QT [Conservative Party Candidate]
Beverley Ann MALTBY, 111 Tower Street, Brightlingsea, Essex [Green Party]
Anne POONIAN, Bhago-Majra, Village Way, Frinton on Sea CO13 0PE [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Gary SCOTT, 21 Laxton Road, Alresford CO7 8EG [Liberal Democrats]


HEYWOOD AND MIDDLETON, House of Commons; caused by the death of Labour MP Jim Dobbin at the age of 73.  Member of Parliament for Heywood and Middleton since 1997, he died while on a Council of Europe visit to Poland.

Ah, northern Greater Manchester.  To the north-east of Manchester is Rochdale, a very unattractive town in the opinion of your columnist but with the redeeming feature of one of the most beautiful town hall buildings in Christendom.  To the north of Manchester is Bury, a post-textile town with military connections and a proud history, whose town centre is thriving thanks to major development despite the hard times of recent years.  In between are Heywood and Middleton, which are, well, none of these things.

The Heywood and Middleton constituency comes in four distinct parts.  The largest part, despite the order of the names, is Middleton, a depressed mill town on the northern edge of Manchester.  Middleton does have some nice bits, such as the residential Alkrington Garden Village, formerly home to the comedians Steve Coogan and Bernard Manning; it also has some dodgy bits such as the Langley Estate, a Manchester overspill development.  To the east is Castleton, a Rochdale suburb which suffered badly from the demise of Woolworth's, who had a large warehouse here; one of the main local employers now is Carcraft, a chain of used car supermarkets based in Castleton.  Further up into the hills, above the Roch valley, is Heywood, another mill town whose economy now is based on the enormous Heywood Distribution Park, an industrial area off the M66 motorway; Heywood is also a recipient of Manchester overspill, this time in the Darnhill estate.  Finally, up to the north in the moors are the Rochdale suburbs of Norden and Bamford, which one of the most affluent areas in the whole of North West England.  Above this area is the uninhabited Scout Moor, home to a large windfarm which can be seen from all over north Manchester.

Most towns in the north of Greater Manchester have a reputation for insularity (a large number of Boltonians think the world ends at the Chequerbent roundabout) but it would be fair to say that Heywood (in particular) and Middleton are more insular than most.  The fact that Heywood has a long-standing nickname of "Monkey Town" probably tells you everything you need to know.  One of your columnist's workmates is from Heywood and he makes Joey Essex look intelligent.

Heywood and Middleton, as a single constituency, dates from 1983.  Before then Middleton was the Labour-voting half of the marginal Middleton and Prestwich constituency, while Heywood was one end of the bizarrely-shaped marginal seat of Heywood and Royton, which wrapped around the north side of Rochdale like a pair of earmuffs.  Before 1983 Heywood and Royton was represented by Joel Barnett, who served in the Cabinet as Chief Secretary to the Treasury during the Callaghan government and whose name has been immortalised in the Barnett Formula, of which we have heard much during the recent Scottish independence referendum.  Barnett had gained the seat from the Tories in 1964 by just 816 votes, and some of his future majorities were small (903 votes in 1970, 2287 votes at the seat's last election in 1979); one famous personality whom he saw off was the future Home Secretary David Waddington, who was the Tory candidate here in 1966.  The Middleton and Prestwich MP before 1983 was Labour's Jim Callaghan; not to be confused with the Prime Minister of the same name, Callaghan had been MP for Middleton and Prestwich since gaining the seat from the Conservatives at the February 1974 general election.  In that election he defeated Alan Haselhurst, who later returned to the Commons for a safe Tory seat in Essex (which he still holds) and served for many years as Deputy Speaker.  

The effect of the creation of Heywood and Middleton in 1983 was to make a safe Labour seat out of two Labour-held marginals.  Barnett retired and Callaghan continued his parliamentary career in the new seat with a majority at that first election of 9.5 points over the Conservatives.  Callaghan would go on to defeat another present Tory MP in the shape of Eric Ollerenshaw, former leader of the Conservative groups on Hackney council and the Greater London Authority; Ollerenshaw fought Heywood and Middleton in 1992 and since 2010 has been MP for Lancaster and Fleetwood.

Callaghan retired in 1997 and handed the seat over to Jim Dobbin, who had unsuccessfully tried in Bury North in 1992.  Born in Fife as the son of a miner, Dobbin had spent his career in the NHS as a microbiologist, and had been a Rochdale councillor since 1983; at the time of his election he was leader of the council.  In Parliament he chaired the all-party pro-life group and voted on moral issues in accordance with his Catholic faith; he was made a papal knight by Benedict XVI.  At his last election in 2010 he polled 40% of the vote to 27% for the Tories and 23% for the Lib Dems; the BNP saved their deposit with 7%.

At Rochdale council level, Bamford and Norden are now safe Tory wards; the only Lib Dem councillor left in Rochdale after the party's epic collapse over the last few years represents North Heywood; and Labour win everything else.  At the most recent local elections in May UKIP came within 24 votes of gaining West Heywood ward.  The Lib Dems in their prime (about seven or eight years ago when they controlled Rochdale council) had a stronghold in Castleton and could win Norden and Bamford, while the Tories did well in South Middleton ward (which includes Alkrington) during the Brown years.  That was before the Lib Dem group in Rochdale comprehensively fell apart during the early years of the coalition, with huge numbers of defections.

Issues in the constituency include a child grooming scandal with racial overtones; the murder last year of Fusilier Lee Rigby, who was from the Langley estate; and a paedophilia scandal involving the late Rochdale MP Cyril Smith.  With racially-charged issues like these, there has been some speculation from people who don't know the area well that UKIP could win this seat.  However, two opinion polls of the constituency have shown clear Labour leads with UKIP in second place, which sounds about right to me.

Defending for Labour is Liz McInnes, selected from a shortlist on which local candidates were conspicuous by their absence; she is the most local of the shortlist, being a councillor in Rossendale on the other side of Scout Moor.  The Tories have selected Bury councillor Iain Gartside.  The Lib Dem candidate is Anthony Smith, from Castleton.  UKIP's candidate is John Bickley, who was runner-up in the Wythenshawe and Sale East by-election earlier this year.  Completing the ballot paper is Middleton-based Abi Jackson, a recent psychology graduate.

John Bickley (UKIP)
Iain Gartside (C)
Abi Jackson (Grn)
Liz McInnes (Lab)
Anthony Smith (LD)

May 2010 result Lab 18499 C 12528 LD 10474 BNP 3239 UKIP 1215 Ind 170

John Joseph BICKLEY, 23 Long Acre, Cuddington, Northwich CW8 2XP [UK Independence Party (UK I P)]
Iain Brian GARTSIDE, 16 The Drive, Bury BL9 5DG [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Abi JACKSON, 127 Kingsway, Middleton, Manchester M24 1HP [Green Party Candidate]
Liz McINNES, 114 Haslingden Old Road, Rossendale BB4 8SA [Labour Party]
Anthony SMITH, 58 Fairway, Rochdale OL11 3BU [Liberal Democrats]


WEST HEATH, Rushmoor borough council; caused by the resignation of UKIP councillor Malcolm Small following a conviction for arson, for which he was sentenced to twelve weeks in prison suspended for two years.  Small had burnt clothes belonging to his wife after an argument over their attendance at the Mayor of Rushmoor's Valentine's Day ball.

With all this focus on UKIP possibly gaining their first elected parliamentary seat this week, it's easy to forget that there is now a UKIP local government caucus which is big enough to generate by-elections of its own.  The second of three UKIP seats up for election this week is West Heath, a residential area in north-western Farnborough based around the Cove Brook and to the north of West Heath Road.  One fact which stands out from the last census is that this ward is in the top 10 for the highest Buddhist population, with 4.25% of the population having that faith - a legacy of Gurkha immigration in recent years.

In that context, it's startling to find that this is a safe UKIP ward, although it is Rushmoor's only UKIP ward.  Rushmoor was re-warded in 2012 so it's difficult to determine trends before that, although the previous Westheath ward was safely Conservative since 2008 and a Tory/Lib Dem marginal before that.  In the Hampshire county elections last year UKIP gained Farnborough West, which covers most of this ward, from the Conservatives by 3.5 points, and were 3 points behind the Conservatives in Farnborough North which covers a small part of the ward.

Defending for UKIP is Dave Bell.  Brian Parker stands for the Conservatives, hoping to return to the council after standing down from Empress ward in May.  Sue Gadsby stands for Labour and Charlie Fraser-Fleming for the Lib Dems.

Dave Bell (UKIP)
Charles Fraser-Fleming (LD)
Sue Gadsby (Lab)
Brian Parker (C)

May 2014 result UKIP 970 C 612 Lab 321 LD 179
May 2012 result UKIP 868/828/821 C 498/473/451 LD 252/230/223 Lab 237/220/186

Dave BELL, 104 West Heath Road, Farnborough GU14 8QY [UKIP]
Charlie FRASER-FLEMING, 18 Anglesey Avenue, Farnborough GU14 8SF [Liberal Democrat]
Sue GADSBY, 56 Juniper Road, Farnborough GU14 9XU [Labour Party Candidate]
Brian William PARKER, 45 Sandy Lane, Farnborough GU14 9HJ [Conservative Party]


SOUTHGATE, Crawley borough council, West Sussex; caused by the resignation of Karl Williamson due to work commitments.  Willamson had been elected as a Conservative councillor but had defected to UKIP since his election.  He works as a flight attendant and has been spending an increasing amount of time out of the UK.

The week's final UKIP defence, in the new town of Crawley.  Southgate ward lies just to the south of Crawley town centre and railway sttaion; while it is mostly New Town development there are some older features, including Goffs Park.  The census figures give this ward a mostly white-collar profile with a relatively high Hindu population.

Crawley is a key Tory/Labour marginal parliamentary constituency, and this is a key marginal Tory/Labour ward.  New Towns often have a reputation for political volatility, but swings here have been quite low and majorities often small.  Labour won all three seats up for the ward after Crawley was last re-warded in 2004, but the Tories gained the Labour seats between 2006 and 2008.  The last three elections have all been decided by fewer than 100 votes: Tory by 95 in 2011, Tory by 66 in 2012, Labour by 65 in May this year.  The ward is part of an equally marginal county division (Southgate and Crawley Central) which Labour gained last year.

Defending for UKIP is Simon Darroch, who fought the town's Maidenbower ward in May.  The Tories want their seat back, and have selected Jan Tarrant who was runner-up in May's election here.  In an interesting move, Labour have recruited Michael Pickett who was the independent candidate for this ward in May.  Completing the ballot paper is Arshad Khan, a regular in Crawley local by-elections for his Justice Party.

Simon Darroch (UKIP)
Arshad Khan (Justice)
Michael Pickett (Lab)
Jan Tarrant (C)

May 2014 result Lab 888 C 823 UKIP 590 Ind 228
May 2012 result C 920 Lab 854 Grn 294
May 2011 result C 1091 Lab 996 Grn 366
May 2010 result C 1839 Lab 1603 BNP 322
May 2008 result C 1040 Lab 786 LD 323
May 2007 result C 900 Lab 721 LD 289 BNP 235 Grn 171
May 2006 result C 936 Lab 738 LD 271 BNP 263 Grn 212
June 2004 result Lab 722/721/674 C 671/605/554 LD 438 Grn 409/369 BNP 294

Simon DARROCH, 9 Waterside Close, Bewbush, Crawley RH11 6BQ [UKIP]
Arshad KHAN, 17 Letchworth Court, Bewbush, Crawley RH11 6EL [Justice Party]
Michael William PICKETT, 12 Malthouse Road, Crawley RH10 6BG [Labour Party Candidate]
Jan TARRANT, 18 Brewer Road, Crawley RH10 6BP [The Conservative Party Candidate]


BICKNACRE AND EAST AND WEST HANNINGFIELD, Chelmsford city council; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Michael Harris at the age of 67, from lung cancer.  Described as "a great loss to the city", Harris had been a Chelmsford city councillor since 2007 and also sat on East Hanningfield parish council.

Yes, that ward name does indeed have two "and"s in it.  Despite that ungrammaticalness, this ward is pretty much as described in the name; three prosperous villages to the south of Chelmsford.

Look at the previous district results, and this by-election looks very boring; the Tories polled 72% of the vote at the last district election in 2011 and 79% four years previously.  The last county election results show that if UKIP stand they can give the Conservatives a run for their money here, although the local county division (Stock) is still safely Conservative.

Defending for the Tories is Matt Flack, from Rettendon Common.  Labour's candidate is Tony Lees, from East Hanningfield, and the Lib Dems have selected Andy Robson from Chelmsford.  Also standing are two new parties for the ward at district level: the Greens, with Reza Hossain; and UKIP, with David Kirkwood.

Matt Flack (C)
Reza Hossain (Grn)
David Kirkwood (UKIP)
Tony Lees (Lab)
Andy Robson (LD)

May 2011 result C 1322/1279 Lab 298/281 LD 225/216
May 2007 result C 1222/1212 LD 168/152 Lab 150/136
May 2003 result C 734/667 Ind 474/177 LD 331 Lab 147/103

Matt FLACK, 1 Bell Court, East Hanningfield Road, Rettendon Common, Chelmsford CM3 8JP [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Reza HOSSAIN, 43 Nash Drive, Broomfield, Chelmsford CM1 7BG [Green Party Candidate]
David Alistair KIRKWOOD, White Cottage, Creephedge Lane, East Hanningfield, Chelmsford CM3 8BP [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Tony LEES, Lea Cottage, The Common, East Hanningfield, Chelmsford CM3 8AH [Labour Party Candidate]
Andy ROBSON, 20 Skinners Lane, Chelmsford CM2 8RH [Liberal Democrat]


WATERLOO, Blackpool council; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Tony Lee at the age of 71.  A Blackpool councillor since 2007, Lee served as Deputy Mayor of Blackpool in 2010/1.

We finish this week as we started, by the seaside, on Blackpool's South Shore.  While Clacton is a little bit out of the way, this Blackpool ward is one of the most touristy locations in the country.  Here can be found the South Pier; the Sandcastle, an indoor water park on the seafront; the southern end of the Golden Mile; part of the Illuminations; and the Pleasure Beach, the UK's single most-visited tourist attraction.  Linking them all together is the Blackpool tramway along the Promenade; if you've not been to Blackpool for a while you may be in for a bit of a surprise, as the tramway has been completely refurbished in recent years with a fleet of shiny new trams, although the traditional trams still exist and operate occassionally for the benefit of tourists.  However, there is less good transport news in Blackpool, with Blackpool Airport threatened with closure next week unless a buyer is found.

This is a Labour/Tory marginal ward where swings are relatively low - more of a Big Dipper than a Big One.  The two parties split the ward's two seats in 2003; the Tories took the Labour seat in 2007 but Labour got one seat back in 2011 to give split representation again.  There was a noticeably large gap in 2011 between the two Labour candidates, which is probably explained by the second Labour candidate having an Asian name.

Fittingly for the location, the Tory and Labour candidates are both hoteliers: the Tories' Derek Robertson runs the Wilmar Hotel, while Labour's Kathy Ellis is propietor of the Castle Holiday Flats.  The Lib Dems have selected Mike Hodkinson, UKIP's candidate is John Braithwaite and the BNP stand Jack Renshaw.

John Braithwaite (UKIP)
Kathy Ellis (Lab)
Mike Hodkinson (LD)
Jack Renshaw (BNP)
Derek Robertson (C)

May 2011 result Lab 937/659 C 793/728 LD 263
May 2007 result C 972/940 Lab 713/605 LD 297
May 2003 result C 1027/895 Lab 1011/887 LD 592/545

John BRAITHWAITE, 27 Boston Way, Blackpool FY4 4YQ [UK Independence Party]
Kathy ELLIS, 7 Windsor Avenue, Blackpool FY4 1HN [Labour Party Candidate]
Mike HODKINSON, 20 Thames Road, Blackpool FY4 1ED [Liberal Democrat]
Jack Andrew RENSHAW, 34 Orchard Avenue, Blackpool FY4 2NX [British National Party]
Derek ROBERTSON, 42 Osborne Road, Blackpool FY4 1HQ [Conservative Party]


