WHITWELL, Bolsover district council, Derbyshire; caused by the resignation of Green Party councillor Duncan Kerr, who has moved to the west of England.

The large village of Whitwell can be found at the very north-eastern corner of Derbyshire, just off the A619 Worksop-Chesterfield road about four miles west of Worksop.  Possibly best known as the home of snooker player Joe Davis, who held the title of world champion continuously from 1927 until retiring undefeated in 1946, Whitwell once claimed to have the largest number of licensed premises per capita in the country.  While much of Bolsover is a coal-mining (or ex-coal-mining) area, Whitwell's main export is limestone from a large quarry outside the village.  The village's railway station reopened in 1998 as part of the Robin Hood Line from Nottingham to Worksop, and has a generally hourly service (but no trains on Sundays).

While Bolsover district as a whole is generally a Labour fiefdom (fittingly for the area which returns Dennis Skinner to Parliament), Whitwell is very much an exception to the rule, with its election results normally dominated by the Whitwell Residents Association.  The Residents held the ward's two district council seats from at least 2003 until 2011, when one of them was taken by the Green Party candidate Duncan Kerr in a rather close result, with Labour and an Independent candidate only about 70 votes behind Kerr and the remaining Residents councillor.  Kerr didn't stand in the simultaneous parish council election (the ward and parish have the same boundaries), which saw Labour winning four seats, the Residents three and the remaining seat going to an independent.  The village went to the polls just three weeks ago in the Derbyshire county council election, but with no Whitwell Residents candidate for the county council the result (Labour winning easily, UKIP a distant second, TUSC beating the Conservatives for third) isn't all that relevant to this by-election.

Duncan Kerr effectively was the Green Party in Bolsover (he had been the council's only Green candidate in 2011) and so there is no defending Green candidate in the by-election which is a straight fight between the Residents and Labour.  The Residents' candidate, parish councillor Viv Mills, is trying to get back on the council after losing her seat in the 2011 election (in which she finished last).  The Labour candidate Frank Raspin was the runner-up in the 2011 parish council election and is married to a Labour parish councillor.

Parliamentary constituency: Bolsover
Derbyshire county council division: Bolsover North
ONS Travel to Work Area: Worksop and Retford

Viv Mills (Whitwell Res Assoc)
Frank Raspin (Lab)

May 2011 result Grn 453 Whitwell Res Assoc 452/326 Lab 383/342 Ind 378
May 2007 result Whitwell Res Assoc 631/468 Ind 429 Lab 357/308
May 2003 result Whitwell Res Assoc 755/618 Lab 428/373

Viv MILLS, 27 Sunnyside, Whitwell, Worksop, Nottinghamshire S80 4SR [Whitwell Residents Association Candidate]
Frank Philip RASPIN, 11 Welbeck Street, Whitwell, Worksop, Nottinghamshire S80 4TE [The Labour Party Candidate]