<blockquote>
"All the right votes, but not necessarily in the right order"
</blockquote>

So, the ordinary local elections are now over.  With the general election just four weeks away now, the locals have helped to clarify where the battleground is: promising targets now seem like lost causes, while seats which may have seemed out of reach have been brought into play.  More evidence on this front is always helpful, and helpfully one of this week's two by-elections is a key marginal ward in a key marginal constituency.  Read on...

WOODVILLE

South Derbyshire council; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Gill Farrington at the age of 74.  She had served since 2015 as district councillor for this ward, and before then was county councillor for Swadlincote Central and Woodville division from 2009 to 2013, and district councillor for Midway ward from 2007 to 2011.  Farrington was a campaigner for the elderly, establishing a meals-on-wheels service for Swadlincote and chairing the South Derbyshire Forum.

http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/misc/s-derbys-woodville.png

For our key marginal by-election today we are in the heart of England, on the Derbyshire-Leicestershire border.  Woodville grew up around a tollbooth just east of Swadlincote on what is now the A511 Burton-Leicester road, and the village was originally named after the tollbooth, bearing the name "Wooden Box" until the mid-nineteenth century.  "Woodville" as a name dates from 1845 when the foundation stone for the Norman revival St Stephen's church was laid.  One of St Stephen's later vicars was Arnold Hurt, a rather strict father who wouldn't let his young son see films in the cinema opposite the vicarage; despite this, John Hurt became one of England's finest actors.  

When young John was living in Woodville it was an industrial village specialising in pottery and pipe-making: the Mount Pleasant Pipeworks produced the majority of the UK's gas fire radiants during the mid-twentieth century.  The pipeworks are gone now, with a housing estate occupying the site, and Woodville has become a suburb of Swadlincote with a skilled working-class demographic and high employment rates.

Politically Woodville ward has been trending to the Conservatives over the last decade, a process accelerated by boundary changes in 2011 which added to the ward the village of Hartshorne and a third councillor. The 2011 election returned two Labour councillors and one Conservative; in 2015 the Conservatives topped the poll but took only one seat off Labour.  The shares of the vote in 2015 were important: the Tory and Labour slates had 33% each with 27% for the UKIP slate, and with UKIP crashing in the opinion polls and last week's county elections this by-election will be an important indicator of where their working-class vote is going to.  Certainly last week's county elections suggest the momentum is with the Conservatives: they gained overall control of Derbyshire county council last week and Swadlincote Central, a previously safe Labour division which covers Woodville proper, was one of the seats to fall.  Hartshorne lies within the Melbourn county division, which is safely Conservative.

Despite having brought the electors of Woodville out to the polls for the second time in as many weeks (confusion over the electoral timetable seems to be responsible for this), the Conservatives should therefore have cause to feel confident about this defence.  Their defending candidate is Raymond Tipping, one of three Woodville parish councillors on the ballot.  Labour have selected the parish council chairman Malc Lee.  UKIP's Mike Dawson will be hoping for a better performance than the 12% he put in in Swadlincote Central division last week, although in that election he did beat the Lib Dems' Rebecca Wilkinson who completes the ballot paper for this by-election.

Parliamentary constituency: South Derbyshire
Derbyshire county council division: Swadlincote Central (part: Woodville parish and unparished part), Melbourne (part: part of Hartshorne parish)

May 2015 result C 1443/1317/1236 Lab 1431/1239/1167 UKIP 1168/839/739 LD 337 
May 2011 result Lab 1145/1107/955 C 982/889/847

Mike DAWSON, 32 Bernard Street, Woodville, Swadlincote DE11 8BZ [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Malc GREE, 3 Briar Close, Newhall, Swadlincote DE11 0RX [Labour Party]
Raymond John TIPPING, 2 Box Close, Woodville, Swadlincote DE11 7GW [Conservative Party Candidate]
Rebecca Jane WILKINSON, Hoots Barn, Ticknall Road, Hartshorne, Swadlincote DE11 7BF [Liberal Democrat]


FAIRSTEAD

King's Lynn and West Norfolk council; caused by the death of Labour councillor Ian Gourlay.

