DUNSTER AND TIMBERSCOMBE
West Somerset council; caused by the resignation of Conservative councillor Bryan Leaker.  A former deputy leader of the Conservative group, Leaker's resignation statement blamed Government cuts to local government.  He had served from 2003 to 2011 for the former Dunster ward, and again since 2015 for this ward; before becoming a councillor he had a 30-year career in business as a senior manager and director for several well-known companies in the railway, hotel, catering and entertainment trades, until recently running Butlin's at Minehead and a hotel in the town; in the 2004 Birthday Honours Leaker was appointed MBE for services to the community in Minehead.

<blockquote>
"The purple-headed mountain,
The river running by,
The sunset and the morning
That brightens up the sky"
-Cecil Frances Alexander, <em>All Things Bright and Beautiful</em>
</blockquote>

Even after over five years of writing by-election previews, your columnist does get to go to some new districts every so on.  West Somerset, holding today its first by-election since 2009, is worth the wait.  This is one of the smallest local government districts in England, with just over 27,000 electors on the December 2016 register; 950 of those live in Dunster and Timberscombe ward, a swathe of the Exmoor National Park to the east and south of Minehead.

http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/misc/w-somerset-dunster-timberscombe.png

Dunster itself is a well-preserved mediaeval village at the mouth of the River Avill, with Dunster Castle and St George's Priory Church, both of which contain 13th-century work, both being Grade I listed, and the 14th-century Dunster Tithe Barn - one of the polling stations for this by-election - being recorded at the Dissolution in 1535 as having a net annual income of £37 4s 8d.  Six centuries of inflation means that the poll clerk today will probably get around twice that.  The wool trade was important to Dunster in mediaeval times, but these days tourism is the only game in town, with the above attractions joined by a doll museum and the preserved West Somerset Railway, which passes through on the way to Minehead.  Overlooking the village is Grabbist Hill, which before its forestation was covered with heather and said to be the inspiration for the purple-headed mountain in the hymn <em>All Things Bright and Beautiful</em>.  Further up the Avill valley is Timberscombe, a tiny Exmoor village perhaps best known as the home of J P Martin, author of the now-forgotten <em>Uncle</em> series of children's books.

The present ward was created in 2011, Dunster having previously been a ward of its own.  In the two previous elections held here it has been safe Tory; the 2015 result saw Leaker win 60-40 in a straight fight with the Green Party.  The ward is split betwen two safe Conservative county council divisions (Dunster, and Dulverton and Exmoor).

Defending for the Conservatives is Andy Parbrook, a builder and Minehead town councillor; his wife Jean is the present Mayor of Minehead.  The Green candidate is Lucy McQuillan.  Completing a longer ballot paper than last time are Peter Pilkington for the Lib Dems and Maureen Smith for Labour.

Parliamentary constituency: Bridgwater and West Somerset
Somerset county council division: Dunster (Dunster parish), Dulverton and Exmoor (Timberscombe parish)

May 2015 result C 424 Grn 288
May 2011 result C 336 Grn 166 Ind 78

Lucy Eleanor MCQUILLAN, Ranscombe Lodge, Wootton Courtenay, Minehead TA24 8RA [Green Party]
Andy PARBROOK, 34 Poundfield Road, Minehead TA24 5ER [Conservative Party]
Peter Charles PILKINGTON, The Lodge, Wheddon Cross, Minehead TA24 7BN [Liberal Democrats]
Maureen Anne SMITH, Pillars, 12 Ballfield Road, Minehead TA24 5JL [Labour Party]


LEOMINSTER SOUTH
Herefordshire council; caused by the death of Independent councillor Peter McCaull.

Connor John EGAN, 4 Holland Road, Leominster HR6 8PF [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Mark John LATIMER, 37 Broad Street, Leominster HR6 8DD
Trish MARSH, 49 Osborne Place, Leominster HR6 8BW [Green Party]
Jon Robert STANNARD, Rose Cottage, Aymestrey, Leominster HR6 9SY [It's Our County (Herefordshire)]
Clive THOMAS, 25 Buckfield Road, Leominster HR6 8SF [Liberal Democrats]


HIGHER CROFT
Blackburn with Darwen council, Lancashire; caused by the death of Labour councillor Don McKinlay.

Ian GRIMSHAW, 15 Ainsworth Close, Darwen BB3 2UL [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Adam HOLDEN, 4 Inglby Close, Blackburn BB1 2BG [Labour Party]
Maureen MCGARVEY, 52 St Michaels Court, Blackburn BB1 5LX [The Conservative Party Candidate]
