Following on from <a="http://election-data.co.uk/local-elections-preview-part-i">last week's marathon description of everything up for election in England this week</a>, it's back to the usual format as we examine the four polls taking place on 4th May in Election Data's home county of Greater Manchester.  This has ended up being a rather more anaemic column than originally intended thanks to the cancellation of the Manchester Gorton by-election, but there's still plenty to chew over in the three local polls up for election.  But we start this week with the marquee contest...

<hr>

<h2>MAYOR OF GREATER MANCHESTER</h2>

Let's go back to 1974, when the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester was created, carved out of parts of Lancashire, Cheshire and Saddleworth (then part of Yorkshire).  It had the usual two-tier structure created by the Heath local government reforms, with a Greater Manchester County Council running county-wide services and the ten metropolitan boroughs of Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan having more local remits.

The 1983 Conservative manifesto contained a commitment to abolish the metropolitan county councils, and the Greater Manchester Council was duly abolished in 1986.  This didn't end the need for services like the fire brigade, waste disposal and public transport to be run on a county-wide basis, and the result was a series of joint boards set up by the borough councils.

The Brown government's 2009 Budget awarded a "Statutory City Region Pilot" status to Greater Manchester, with subsequent legislation allowing the ten borough councils to set up a combined authority with similar powers to the Greater London Authority.  Notable in this were increased powers on public transport, regeneration, housing, skills, planning and carbon neutrality.  This led to the creation of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority subsuming all the joint boards, which was approved by the Brown government in its dying days, confirmed by the Coalition and came into operation in April 2011.

The Coalition continued and further developed the Brown government's strategy of devolution to English cities, and the GMCA has grasped its opportunities enthusiastically: it is to take over Greater Manchester's NHS budget and some crimnal justice functions, significant new powers over the county's public transport (including a London-style bus franchising system which has been overdue for 31 years) and has already taken over the functions of the county's Police and Crime Commissioner.  The price for this was to have an elected mayor: a single elected person to sit on the GMCA and overview all these things.  To quote from the booklet I have sent from the Greater Manchester returning officer, "the Mayor will have various powers and responsibilities, including the fire service, transport, planning and housing and also those previously held by the Police and Crime Commissioner".

In advance of this election the outgoing PCC, Tony Lloyd, is acting as mayor on an interim basis: he is part of a 10-1 Labour majority on the GMCA which also includes the ten borough council leaders, nine of whom (Cliff Morris of Bolton, Rishi Shori of Bury, Sir Richard Leese of Manchester, Jean Stretton of Oldham, Richard Farnell of Rochdale, Salford's elected mayor Paul Dennett, Stockport's Alex Ganotis, Kieran Quinn of Tameside and Wigan's Lord Smith of Leigh) are Labour, with Trafford council leader Sean Anstee providing the only Conservative vote.  

That Labour majority is very much in keeping with Greater Manchester as a whole.  In the 2015 general election Labour polled 46% across the county to 26% for the Conservatives and 16% for UKIP.  The county has delivered big Labour leads at every county-wide poll in the last fifteen years with the exception of the 2008 local elections, in which the Tories narrowly polled the most votes, and the 2009 European election in which Labour were only narrowly ahead.  Labour had an absolute majority of votes across the county in the 2011 and 2012 local elections and also in the only previous county-wide contest for a single post, the 2012 Police and Crime Commissioner election which Lloyd won in the first round, polling 51% to 16% for the Conservatives and 15% for the Lib Dems.  Last of the five candidates in that election was UKIP's Steven Woolfe, who has had worse fights.

So, the indications are that this is Labour's to lose.  They have selected a strong (if Scouse) candidate in Andy Burnham, outgoing MP for Leigh; elected to Parliament in 2001 at the age of 31 after having been special advisor to Culture secretary Chris Smith, Burnham joined the ranks of government in 2005 as a junior Home Office minister, and served in Cabinet throughout the Brown administration as Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Culture secretary and finally Health secretary from 2009, initiating the inquiries into Hillsborough and the Stafford Hospital scandal.  The Labour defeat in 2010 ended Burnham's government career and he stood for the Labour leadership, coming fourth out of five candidates.  Ed Miliband kept Burnham on as shadow health secretary throughout the 2010-15 Parliament, apart from a year as shadow education secretary.  Burnham stood again for the Labour leadership in 2015, improving his placing to second but a long way behind Jeremy Corbyn; Corbyn appointed him as shadow home secretary.

Burnham resigned from the Shadow Cabinet in 2016 to concentrate on campaigning for the new Greater Manchester Mayoral post.  He defeated for the Labour nomination Tony Lloyd, the police and crime commissioner and former Manchester Central MP, and Bury South MP Ivan Lewis.  In his personal life Burnham is one of the few modern MPs to have played high-level football - in July 2003 he was a substitute for Leigh RMI, then a Conference team, in a 1-1 pre-season draw against his beloved Everton.

Standing for the Conservatives is Sean Anstee, the leader of Trafford council and the only present Conservative member of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority.  According to his election communciation, he started work at 16 as an apprentice in the industrial village of Partington; he has served since 2008 as councillor for Bowdon ward, covering south-western Altrincham and a series of small villages to the west which lie within the Greater Manchester boundary.

The UKIP candidate is Shneur Odze, a rabbi from the large Jewish community in Broughton and a former Conservative figure: he served as a Hackney councillor in London before moving up north, and came close to winning Salford's Kersal ward on a few occasions in the mid-2000s; his most recent electoral outing was in 2014 when he contested Kersal ward under his new purple colours and was on the UKIP European list for north-west England.  The <em>Daily Mail</em> last week had some rather scurrilous accusations about Odze, but it would be wrong to give any credence to a source which isn't good enough for Wikipedia.  Odze did not provide an election address for the official candidate booklet.

Like the Conservatives, the Lib Dems have turned to Trafford for their candidate.  Jane Brophy, a long-serving NHS worker, has since 2008 been a councillor for Timperley ward in northern Altrincham and has clearly developed a large personal vote there, judging from the ward's recent results which show wild Tory-Lib Dem swings.  

The Green Party had to reselect following the sudden death of their original candidate Deyika Nzeribe earlier this year; their replacement is Will Patterson, who fought his home seat of Wigan at the last general election.  Two independent candidates are having a go: Mohamed Aslam, who gives an address in Salford 7, and businessman Marcus Farmer who stood in Manchester Withington in 2015 and polled sixty-one votes; and completing the ballot paper is Bury's English Democrats figure Stephen Morris, whose campaigning cannot be underestimated even if his electoral appeal is limited.

November 2012 police and crime commissioner election Lab 139437 C 42478 LD 40318 Ind 26664 UKIP 23256

<hr>

<h2>RUSHOLME</h2>

Manchester city council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Kate Chappell.

<hr>

<h2>BROADHEATH</h2>

Trafford council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Louise Dagnall.

<hr>

<h2>BESSES</h2>

Bury council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Alan Matthews.

