<blockquote>
"All the right votes, but not necessarily in the right order"
</blockquote>

The phoney war is now well and truly over, and there is just a week to go now until the 2017 ordinary local government elections.  All the by-elections in advance of May are now finished: there are none this week but next week there are no fewer than one hundred and seven casual vacancies up for election.  No, I am not going to preview 107 local by-elections in the amount of detail readers have grown accustomed to: I have a full-time job (for the moment; reasonable offers of employment after November will be considered) and simply don't have the time to do that sort of research.  Instead, forming the first part of a two-part preview, here is a short rundown of all the vacancies up for election next week.  Read on...

<hr>

<h2>NORTH EAST</h2>

We start, as most government statistics of this type do, in north-east England.  The north-east has an entirely unitary local government structure since the abolition of the Durham and Northumberland district councils in 2009.

The unitary <em>Northumberland</em> council is up for election in its entirety.  This is a hung council, with Labour presently two seats short of a majority and running a minority administration.  The Labour seats are concentrated in the densely-populated south-east of the county, with the Tories and Lib Dems splitting the rest, and Labour pretty much maxed out their seats in 2013; the two most plausible Labour targets are Plessey division in Blyth (LD majority of 5.7%) and Haltwhistle (C majority of 6.4%), with everything else requiring a swing of over 5%.  Another hung council looks on the cards here.

The only poll this year in <em>Tyne and Wear</em> is for the North Tyneside mayoralty.  This is traditionally a see-saw contest with no mayor having been re-elected since the position was instituted in 2002.  Labour mayor Norma Redfearn is seeking re-election and is challenged by Stewart Hay for the Conservatives, a solicitor and former police officer who stood for Northumbria police and crime commissioner in 2016; the Lib Dems' John Appleby and UKIP's Stuart Houghton complete the ballot paper.

The unitary <em>Durham</em> council is up for election.  This has a large Labour majority at present (96 out of 126 seats) which looks in little danger.  The only significant Tory vote in the county comes from the deeply rural Teesdale area; Labour's main opposition comes from independents of various stripes, while the Lib Dems wil be looking for gains in the city of Durham itself.

Darlington and the four councils covering the Teesside area will combine to poll for the <em>Tees Valley</em> combined authority.  The Tees Valley mayoralty should be an easy win for Labour's Sue Jeffrey, the leader of Redcar and Cleveland council, although they have performed poorly in by-elections in Redcar and Middlesbrough over the last two months, losing the outlying Middlesbrough estate of Coulby Newham to the Conservatives three weeks ago.  That win will give some encouragement to the Tory candidate Ben Houchen, who leads the Tory group on Stockton council, while the Lib Dems' Chris Foote Wood, a long-standing activist who led the former Wear Valley district council for six years and was Victoria Wood's brother, and UKIP's John Tennant, who leads the party's group on Hartlepool council, complete the mayoral ballot paper.  For UKIP this contest probably plays second fiddle to an important local by-election in Hartlepool, where they will try to gain the <b>Headland and Harbour</b> ward from Labour - this ward was a UKIP gain in the 2016 ordinary elections and in a by-election shortly afterwards, and this poll is an opportunity for the Kippers to gain all three of the ward's seats within a year.  Mike McLaughlin defends for Labour, Tom Cassidy will try to gain for UKIP.

<hr>

<h2>NORTH WEST</h2>

Moving over the Pennines we come to our first two-tier area.  <em>Cumbria</em> county council is under no overall control with the administration being a coalition of Labour and the Lib Dems.  Despite the Copeland by-election result not much change is likely from the general pattern, with Labour being the largest party thanks to their strength in Carlisle, the West Cumbria coalfield and Barrow, the Lib Dems doing well in Tim Farron's constituency and the Conservatives picking up most of the rest.  Neil Hughes - one of the <em>7 Up</em> children - is seeking re-election for the Lib Dems in the Eden Lakes division, a large area stretching from Ullswater to Shap and Tebay.  In local by-elections Labour defend Belle Vue and Yewdale wards, two neighbouring wards on the western edge of Carlisle: Belle Vue looks safe enough for Pamela Birks but Yewdale is a key marginal, with David Graham looking to defend a 2.3% lead over the Tories' Christina Finlayson.  The Lib Dems have a safe local by-election to defend in the tourist central Ambleside and Grasmere ward, which should return Vicky Hughes to South Lakeland council.  A Conservative-held vacancy in Copeland district - for Newtown ward, the eastern of the three wards covering Millom - came too late to be included in the May elections and will held in due course.

Moving over the sands into <em>Lancashire</em> we have a key contest for the county council which is finely balanced between the Conservatives and Labour.  Labour are presently the largest party, four seats ahead of the Tories but four seats short of a majority, and are running a minority administration with Lib Dem support.  Boundary changes here make it difficult to make a firm prediction.  Four by-elections are combined with the county elections, two of them in Preston: Ashton ward, in the west of town overlooking the docks, was Tory in the pit of the last Labour governemnt but should be safe enough for Labour's Liz Atkins - a former councillor for the ward and wife of the former Labour MP Ron Atkins, who will turn 100 this year - while Rural East ward, covering three parishes to the north and east of Preston, is rock-solid for the Tories' Ron Woollam.  To the west of Preston, Fylde council has a by-election for the aerospace-influenced Warton and Westby ward in which the Tories' John Kirkham will defend against a challenge from independent Dan Docherty; while further north in Thornton-Cleveleys Labour have a difficult defence in the split Bourne ward of Wyre council.  Joanne Cooper defends for Labour with Emma Ellison defending for the Conservatives.  Outside the county council area we have a poll in the volatile Marsh House ward in south-eastern Darwen, which in the last ten years has voted for all three main parties and a localist "For Darwen" slate, and was a Tory gain from Labour last year by a margin of just two votes; Labour's Kieran Richards is defending the party's last seat in the ward from the Tories' Lynn Perkins.  One further poll in Lancashire on 4th May is a referendum on whether to introduce an elected mayoralty in Burrnley.  The well-publicised cock-up in Blackburn's Higher Croft ward in March, where the winning Labour candidate in a by-election turned out to be ineligible, wasn't sorted out in time for the next Higher Croft by-election to be on 4th May, and there are further by-elections pending in West Lancashire and Fleetwood.

The marquee contest in <em>Merseyside</em> is for the Liverpool City Region mayor - this is a different office from the Liverpool City Council mayor which is different again from the Lord Mayor of Liverpool.  Please don't get confused.  The City Region mayoralty - which will be contested over the five Merseyside boroughs plus the Cheshire borough of Halton - has attracted eight candidates, but the main question will be whether Labour's Steve Rotheram, a former Lord Mayor of Liverpool and since 2010 MP for Liverpool Walton, will win in the first round or be pushed to transfers.  This contest has attracted eight candidates: in alphabetical order, Roger Bannister of the Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition is a longstanding UNISON activist; Paul Breen is standing under the label "Get the Coppers Off the Jury"; the Tories have selected businessman Tony Caldeira who fought the Liverpool city mayoralty in 2012 and 2016; the Lib Dem candidate is Carl Cashman who leads the party group on Knowsley council; the Greens' Tom Crone leads the party group on Liverpool council; Tabitha Morton stands for the Women's Equality Party and civil servant Paula Walters is the UKIP candidate.  There are two local by-elections in the county: in Wavertree ward of Liverpool (once a Lib Dem powerhouse repesented by council leaders Mike Storey and Warren Bradley), and over the river in Birkenhead's Claughton ward; both these wards are safe Labour and should return Clare McIntyre to Liverpool council and Gillian Wood to Wirral council.

Apart from the Liverpool City Region mayor election in Halton, there are no polls in <em>Cheshire</em> on 4th May.  In case you were worried that I'd forgotten Election Data's own <em>Greater Manchester</em>, fear not: that will be the subject of Part II of this preview next week as we go back to the normal format and the usual level of detail.

<hr>

<h2>YORKSHIRE AND THE HUMBER</h2>

Yorkshire is one of the quieter regions this year.  With Humberside county council long gone, none of the West Yorkshire councils having signed a devolution deal and the South Yorkshire mayoral election postponed to 2018, the major contest here will be for <em>North Yorkshire</em> county council.  This is currently strongly Conservative, and the Tories' task in holding on here is made easier by the fact that they have won two seats - Stillington and Thirsk - unopposed.  One by-election is combined with the county election, in Aire Valley with Lothersdale ward of Craven council - a series of villages to the south of Skipton - where the defending Tory candidate Gemma Harling is opposed only by the Green Party.  A further by-election in Richmondshire will be held on 18th May.

The former <em>Humberside</em> has no elections of any sort on 4th May; a recent vacancy in Brumby ward of Scunthorpe arose too late to be called for 4th May.

The one local by-election in <em>West Yorkshire</em> is in Queensbury.  Did somebody say Queensbury?

https://youtu.be/A9cE8OFjUQA

(Got it right this time.)  Yes, that's Queensbury's finest export, the superlative Black Dyke Band who are the ambassadors for a very strange ward of Bradford council on the hill towards Halifax.  The ward's election results in recent years have been dominated by Lynda and Paul Cromie, who were originally elected as BNP councillors but have since left the party and both been re-elected as independents; Lynda lost her seat to the Tories in 2015 but returned in 2016 with the Tories pushed into fourth place behind UKIP and Labour, and it is the Tory seat which is up in this by-election.  Their defending candidate Andrew Senior is challenged by independent Jason Smith - who was the UKIP candidate last year - Mobeen Hussain for Labour, Eithne Dodwell for the Greens and Mary Whitrick for the Lib Dems.

Finishing in <em>South Yorkshire</em> where the Mayor and council are up for re-election in Doncaster.  Labour mayor Ros Jones, who defeated the English Democrats' Peter Davies in 2013, is seeking re-election for a second term and is opposed by independent Eddie Todd, George Jabbour of the Conservatives, Steve Williams of the Trade Unonist and Socialist Coalition, UKIP's Brian Whitmore and Chris Whitwood standing for the Yorkshire Party.  The only by-election in the county on 4th May is for Southey ward on the northern edge of Sheffield, where Mike Chaplin will look to succeed the Labour deputy leader of the council Leigh Bramall; one notable feature of this poll is the presence of Carol Keen, the first local by-election candidate for the Women's Equality Party.

<hr>

<h2>EAST MIDLANDS</h2>

Now we get into the two-tier heartland of England by passing into the Midlands.  Two of the East Midlands counties will be closely watched on election night are Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, both Labour gains in the 2013 election: <em>Nottinghamshire</em> in particular looks vulnerable given the state of the current polls.  There have no local by-elections in Nottinghamshire so far this year but there are three on 4th May.  Sherwood ward in eastern Nottingham is a safe ward which should return Labour's Adele Williams; veteran by-election candidate and Elvis impersonator David Bishop, who once finished ahead of the Lib Dems in a by-election to Nottingham council, may have hung up his blue suede shoes at the parliamentary level but is still tempted to try his luck once more in his home city.  In Newark and Sherwood district, Labour are defending the safe Ollerton ward on what is now the ex-Nottinghamshire coalfield, while in Rushcliffe the Tories face a contest in Thoroton ward where they were unopposed in 2015.  Labour's Neal Mitchell and the Tories' Sarah Bailey should face few problems in their respective contests.

In <em>Derbyshire</em> there are no by-elections to detract from the county election in which Labour have a large but no particularly strong majority.  The one pending poll in the county, in Woodville ward of South Derbyshire, was intended to be called for 4th May but the deadline for doing so was missed, and this ward will now poll on 11th May.

A similar situation pertains in <em>Lincolnshire</em> where there are no pending by-elections of any sort.  Lincolnshire county council is hung at present but the Tories should have no trouble regaining control: the large UKIP cohort elected in 2013 has fallen apart and the Lincolnshire Independents seem, judging from the candidate list, to be less well organised than in recent years.

The Tories' majority on <em>Leicestershire</em> council is small - 32 seats out of 55 - but looks secure at first sight.  The county elections are combined with three by-elections, all in marginal wards.  In the northern Leicester suburb of Birstall the defending Tory candidate Roy Rollings in Birstall Wanlip ward will be challenged by the Lib Dems' Simon Sansome for a seat on Charnwood council.  The other two by-elections are in neighbouring wards in the north-west corner of Melton Mowbray: in Egerton ward the seat previously held by independent Tina Culley will be fought by Peter Faulkner for the Tories (who hold the ward's other seat) and Mike Brown for Labour, while in Sysonby ward the Tories' Alison Freer-Jones should hold the seat against Labour's Vanessa Jackson.  There are no elections of any sort this year in <em>Rutland</em>.

Finally in this region we come to the safe Tory <em>Northamptonshire</em> council where there are no fewer than five by-elections on 4th May, all defended by the Conservatives.  Two of these are in Kettering district: St Peter's ward on the western edge of Kettering should be held by the Tories' Paul Marks, while Burton Latimer ward to the south-east is shaping up to be an interesting three-way contest between defending Tory candidate John Currall, independent Christopher Groome (whose wife is already a councillor for the ward) and UKIP's Sam Watts.  In East Northants district Prebendal ward (a rural ward to the north of Oundle, including the village of Fotheringhay) should be safe for the wonderfully-named Annabel de Capell Brooke, while Malcolm Longley should hold Long Buckby ward in Daventry district and, in the western corner of the county, Kings Sutton ward should be an easy defence for Gregor Hopkins.

<hr>

<h2>WEST MIDLANDS</h2>

Moving west of Watling Street we come to <em>Warwickshire</em>, a county council which the Tories lost overall control of in 2013 due to losses in marginal Nuneaton and industrial North Warwickshire.  Labour put in a good performance last year in Nuneaton, although not good enough to make safe the Labour by-election defence in the marginal Bulkington ward - a village to the south-east of Nuneaton which has produced some very close results in recent years.  This by-election is a straight fight between Labour's Jack Bonner and the Tories' Rich Smith.  There are three more by-elections in Warwickshire on 4th May, two of them in Rugby: the Tories' Sebastian Lowe should hold Coton and Boughton, a ward of new estates on the northern edge of town, while Labour's Mike Brader is not under serious threat in New Bilton ward covering the western Rugby.  In Stratford-on-Avon district the Tories' Penny-Anne O'Donnell should hold Ettington ward, a rural area centred on the Fosse Way south-east of Stratford.

<em>Worcestershire</em> county council should be an easy defence for the Tories, and its election is combined with five by-elections.  One of them is the only Green by-election defence on 4th May, in the West ward of Malvern Hills: this is the village of West Malvern, and new Green candidate Natalie McVey should hold the seat even with the intervention of Labour and the Lib Dems.  The other four Worcestershire by-elections are Conservative defences and only one of those looks in serious danger: this is Mitton ward in Stourport-on-Severn, which returned a full slate of Tories to Wyre Forest council in 2015 but the party finished third in the ward last year behind Health Concern and UKIP.  Howard Williams defends for the Conservatives against John Thomas for Health Concern, John Holden for UKIP, Cliff Brewer for Labour and two other candidates.  In Wychavon district, Sital Harris should win Droitwich South East and Matt Snape should win Evesham South, while Bill Amos should hold Bedwardine ward in Worcester.

There are no elections of any sort this year in <em>Herefordshire</em>, while in <em>Shropshire</em> the unitary county council is up.  The Tories have a decent majority on Shropshire council but their administration is scandal-prone which has led to some embarassing by-election performances, the most spectacular of which was losing a seat in Oswestry to the Green Party; I can't see them losing control myself but you never know with these things.

Turning to <em>Staffordshire</em>, a county which the Tories hold with a small majority which should be impregnable on current polling.  There are five local by-elections in Staffordshire including a rare double by-election in Stafford, with both seats up in the safe Labour ward of Highfields and Western Downs in the west of the town.  David Barron and Mike Winkle form the new Labour slate.  Lichfield district will see a change in composition: the council's only UKIP member has resigned his seat in Fazeley ward - a Tamworth suburb - and the party are not defending the by-election.  This should be picked up by either Brian Hoult for the Tories or Glen Mynott for Labour.  We're only five months into the year but East Staffordshire district is already having its third and fourth by-elections of 2017; Shobnall ward in central Burton (including the town's wonderful town hall) should be a safe defence for Labour's Paul Walker, but Horninglow ward in north-western Burton is a marginal with Labour's Louise Walker will have to defend from the Tories' Deneice Florence-Jukes.  Finally, the Tories' Jo Chapman should have little trouble in defending Penkridge West ward on South Staffordshire council.

The West Midlands metropolitan districts are not up this year.  Instead we have the inaugural <em>West Midlands</em> mayoral election, which is shaping up to be a tight rate between Labour's Siôn Simon, an MEP for the West Midlands since 2014 and MP for Birmingham Erdington 2001-10; and the Tories' Andy Street, former managing director of the John Lewis Partnership.  Also on the ballot are 2016 PCC candidate Pete Durnell for UKIP, businesswoman Beverley Nielsen for the Lib Dems, James Burn for the Green Party who leads the surprisingly large party group on Solihull council, and Graham Stevenson of the Communist Party of Britain.  The mayoral election is combined with two by-elections in Birmingham; Labour candidate Liz Clements' task in defending the safe Hall Green ward has been made even easier by the Tories having to disown their candidate Obaid Khan for anti-Semitism; while the Lib Dems' Morriam Jan will defend the Lib Dem ward of Perry Barr which has been a Labour target for years without ever falling to them.




