Welcome to English Elections as we enter the general election year of 2015.  Your columnist must start with an apology for missing the year's first by-election, a Labour hold in Bolsover, Derbyshire two weeks ago; in my defence, the publicity for the poll was clearly as poor as the turnout.  We get up to speed properly this week with a Tory defence in East Sussex and an SNP defence in Fife, which will be covered on Scottish Elections.

CROWBOROUGH WEST, Wealden district council, East Sussex; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Anthony Quin.  Quin had served as a Wealden councillor since 1999 after a career in the Royal Marines, from which he retired with the rank of Major.  He served on several committees during his time as a councillor and for some years chaired the regulatory and audit committee.

The largest inland town in East Sussex, Crowborough can be found in the High Weald seven miles south-west of Tunbridge Wells.  The town grew in the mid-Victorian period following the completion of the town's rail link to London; at the time it was promoted as health resort thanks to its relatively high altitude and surrounding forest.  Crowborough lies on the eastern edge of Ashdown Forest, the setting for A A Milne's Winnie-the-Pooh stories, and also has literary connections as the home of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who died here in 1930; Conan Doyle has a statue in the town centre and Crowborough once hosted an annual Sherlock Holmes festival.

The Crowborough West ward is a safe Tory ward where the party are not seriously challenged.  At the most recent election in 2011 the two-person Tory slate polled 73% in a straight fight with a single Labour candidate.  The Tories hold both the county council seats for the town as a whole, with the runner-up spot at the last county elections in 2013 going to an independent who was just ahead of the UKIP slate.

Whoever wins this by-election is likely to be back on the campaign trail immediately in order to seek re-election at May's ordinary election.  Defending in the blue corner is Jeannette Towey, an accredited tennis referee and volunteer at Citizens Advice.  Challenging in the purple corner is Simon Staveley, a manager at an IT company.

Parliamentary constituency: Wealden
East Sussex county council division: Crowborough
ONS Travel to Work Area: Tunbridge Wells
Postcode districts: TN6, TN7

May 2011 result C 1387/1225 Lab 517
May 2007 result C 992/954 LD 336 Lab 192
May 2003 result C 814/812 LD 394 Lab 238

Simon STAVELEY, 1 Elphick Place, Crowborough TN6 2RQ [UK Independence Party (UK I P)]
Jeannette Elizabeth TOWEY, 6 Coombe Edge, Crowborough TN6 2GS [The Conservative Party Candidate]


KIRKCALDY EAST, Fife council; caused by the resignation of SNP councillor Arthur Morrison, who now lives and works in Austria.

This ward is based on the old town of Dysart, a royal burgh which was an important port from the late mediaeval period, exporting salt and coal to the Low Countries; as a result of this trade Dysart became known as "Salt Burgh" or "Little Holland".  The port declined in the inter-war period following the closure of the local colliery, and in 1930 Dysart was annexed by Kirkcaldy.  

The Kirkcaldy East ward has several other points of interest, notably the ruined Ravenscraig Castle on the coast at Pathhead.  Pathhead also includes the Manse in which the polymath John Buchan and his novelist sister O. Douglas were brought up; while traditional industries in the village include nailmaking, as commemorated in Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations and on the Bank of England £20 note.  There is still manufacturing in the ward, with a flour mill and one of the world's biggest linoleum factories.

This was one of the weakest areas of Kirkcaldy for Labour at the 2003 elections to Fife council, the party winning just one of the predecessor first-past-the-post wards (Dysart and Gallatown) while the SNP won the other two (Glebe Park, Pathhead and Sinclairtown by 23 votes over Labour, and Smeaton and Overton more comfortably).  The first PR election to Fife in 2007 saw Labour top the poll in the ward with 42% to 35% for the SNP, 12% for the Lib Dems and 8% for the Tories; Labour took two seats to the SNP's one, but the second Labour seat had a majority of just nine votes over the Lib Dems who got strong transfers from the Conservatives.  In 2012 the votes for smaller parties crashed and Labour polled 50% to 36% for the SNP, the two Labour councillors being comfortably re-elected and the SNP winning the final seat.

Much has been made recently of an SNP surge in Scottish opinion polling, but their local by-election performances since the referendum have been mixed, so an SNP hold in this by-election could be an important indicator for the next general election.  Their candidate is Marie Penman, who ran the Yes campaign in Kirkcaldy.  Labour have selected Liz Easton, who is a manager at the Kirkcaldy YMCA.  Also standing are Edgar Cook for the Conservatives; Callum Leslie for the Lib Dems; Peter Adams for UKIP; independent candidates Ronald Hunter and Alastair Macintyre, who will probably dispute the UKIP vote (Macintyre is a former UKIP figure); and Claire Reid from the Scottish Green Party.

Westminster constituency: Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath (except for a small part in Glenrothes)
Holyrood constituency: Kirkcaldy
ONS Travel to Work Area: Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes
Postcode districts: KY1, KY2

Peter Adams (UKIP)
Edgar Cook (C)
Liz Easton (Lab)
Ronald Hunter (Ind)
Callum Leslie (LD)
Alastair Macintyre (Ind)
Marie Penman (SNP)
Claire Reid (Grn)

May 2012 first preferences Lab 1856 SNP 1352 C 224 All Scotland Pensioners Party 180 LD 104
May 2007 first preferences Lab 1994 SNP 1680 LD 572 C 361 SSP 138

Peter ADAMS, 61 Dunrobin Road, Kirkcaldy KY2 5YT [UKIP]
Edgar COOK, Kyleakin, Boreland Road, Dysart, Kirkcaldy KY1 2YG [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Liz EASTON, 18 Canmore Street, Kinghorn, Burntisland KY3 9RH [Scottish Labour Party]
Ronald HUNTER, 320 High Street, Methil, Leven KY8 3UJ [Independent]
Callum LESLIE, 1 Grampian Gardens, Kirkcaldy KY2 5RJ [Scottish Liberal Democrats]
Alastair MACINTYRE, 18 Webster Place, Rosyth, Dunfermline KY11 2TU [Independent]
Marie PENMAN, 10 Matthew Street, Kirkcaldy KY2 5AY [Scottish National Party (SNP)]
Claire REID, 11 Glover's Court, Kinghorn, Burntisland KY3 9XT [Scottish Green Party]

