<blockquote>
"All the right votes, but not necessarily in the right order"
</blockquote>

After four hard days and nights of counting, the largest ever set of UK local elections (in terms of ballot paper numbers) is over.  Let's summarise what happened.

The Britain Elects team have <a href="https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/elections/2021/05/2021-english-local-election-results-ward-ward">mapped all the results beautifully (link)</a>, and you may wish to refer to this map when looking at the text below, as I haven't had time to prepare maps of my own.  Results will go onto your columnist's own <a href="https://www.andrewteale.me.uk/leap/">Local Elections Archive Project (link)</a> in the usual slow timescale, although the by-election results are already there.

<h2 id="scotland">Scotland</h2>

Possibly the most consequential poll of all last week was that for the Scottish Parliament.  This saw relatively little change, with the Scottish National Party having won 63 seats in 2016, two short of an overall majority; this time they finished on 64 seats, one short of a majority.  That seat gain was the result of the retirement of the former Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson, who is retiring to the Lords; the SNP picked up her former constituency of Edinburgh Central.  The Conservatives offset that loss by gaining a seat from Labour in the Highlands and Islands region.  The other party to gain seats in the Holyrood elections was the Greens, which took a seat from the Lib Dems in the North East region and from Labour in the Central region.

Overall the Scottish National Party now have (as stated) 64 MSPs, the Conservatives have 31, Labour 22, the Greens 8 and the Lib Dems 4.  The SNP minority administration looks set to continue.  With an increased majority for the pro-independence SNP and Greens, another referendum on independence for Scotland could be on the cards.

On the undercard, the Forth and Endrick by-election to Stirling council was won by the Conservatives, gaining a seat from the SNP.

<h2 id="wales">Wales</h2>

The sixth Senedd Cymru elections (not the fifth, as I said in the preview) were a convincing win for the Labour party which now holds half of the seats in the Welsh Parliament.  Labour's net gain of one seat was a result of unseating the former Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood in the Rhondda constituency.  The Conservatives gained two constituencies, Brecon and Radnorshire from the Liberal Democrats and Vale of Clwyd from Labour, but the Lib Dems and Labour offset those losses by picking up regional seats which had been won by UKIP in 2016.  UKIP were wiped out, with the Conservatives and Plaid as the main beneficiaries.

The new Senedd has 30 Labour MSs, 16 Conservatives, 13 Plaid and 1 Lib Dem.  Labour intend to govern alone.  In the last Senedd Elin Jones, the Plaid Cymru MS for Ceredigion, acted as Llywydd (equivalent to the Speaker of the Commons); if she wishes to continue in that role then Labour would have a working majority in the chamber, otherwise they would be forming a minority administration.

Plaid Cymru failed to defend the North Wales Police and Crime Commissionership, but their transfers ensured that Labour came from behind on first preferences to defeat the Conservatives 52-48 in the runoff.  There was another come-from-behind victory for Plaid in Dyfed-Powys; the Conservatives had led 34.0-33.6 on first preferences but Plaid won the runoff convincingly.  Labour had no trouble defending the PCCs for Gwent and South Wales.

The only seat to change hands among the Welsh local by-elections was in Rhondda Cynon Taf, where Labour gained the Penrhiwceiber division convincingly from the Cynon Valley Party.  Their outgoing councillor, who had been controversially disqualified for not attending any meetings in six months, sought re-election but finished a distant second.  The closest result was in the Aberavon division of Neath Port Talbot, where Labour held off Plaid Cymru by 30 votes, 677 to 647.

<h2 id="london">Greater London</h2>

Labour's Sadiq Khan was re-elected as Mayor of London as expected, although the result was closer than anticipated.  On first preferences he led the Conservatives' Shaun Bailey by 40-35, increasing that lead to 55-45 in the runoff: 1,206,034 votes to 977,601.

The Labour party also went backwards in the London Assembly, losing one of the twelve seats they were defending.  UKIP came nowhere near holding their two seats, and all the other parties in the Assembly picked up an extra Londonwide seat.  The new Assembly will have 11 Labour members, 9 Conservatives, 3 Greens and 2 Lib Dems.

On the undercard, three of London's 46 council by-elections resulted in a seat change.  The Conservatives gained two seats from Labour, Chase ward in Enfield and East Barnet ward in Barnet, while the Green Party came nowhere near defending their Richmond council seat in Hampton Wick ward which went convincingly to the Liberal Democrats.  The thirteen Official Monster Raving Loony candidates in the Chessington South ward of Kingston upon Thames polled 92 votes between them, with Undertaking Director Brunskill having the best score of 16 and Sam Squatch and Rev Robbie the Radical Recyclist sharing the wooden spoon on one vote each; six of the Loonies finished ahead of the Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition candidate, who polled seven votes.

<h2 id="northumbria">North East</h2>

Kim McGuinness was re-elected as the Labour PCC for Northumbria without fuss, defeating the Conservatives 60-40 in the runoff.

In vote terms, Northumberland council swung to Labour compared with May 2017, but England's first-past-the-post electoral system had other ideas.  In 2017 the Conservatives had won 33 seats, one short of a majority, tied for first place in South Blyth and lost the drawing of lots to the Liberal Democrats.  This year they won 33 seats, one short of a majority, tied for first place in Berwick West with Ord and lost the drawing of lots to the Liberal Democrats - and also tied for first place in Hartley and won the drawing of lots against Labour.  That tiebreak means that Northumberland now has a Conservative overall majority.  Don't let anybody tell you your vote never changed anything.

Labour remain in control of the five Tyne and Wear boroughs, but they lost another nine seats in Sunderland.  Another year like that and it'll be No Overall Control time there.  Norma Redfearn was re-elected as the Labour mayor of North Tyneside in the first round, with a 53-31 lead over the Conservatives.

The Labour vote in County Durham collapsed and they very nearly lost the police and crime commissionership.  Labour's Joy Allen led the Conservatives' George Jabbour in the first count by 43.8% to 43.0%, going on to increase her lead in the runoff to 51-49.  Labour have lost control of Durham council, losing 21 seats mostly to the Conservatives; the new council has 53 Labour councillors, 31 independents, 24 Conservatives, 17 Lib Dems and a Green Party member.

The Conservatives scored a clean sweep of the elections in the Tees Valley.  Ben Houchen was re-elected as Mayor with a stonking 73-27 lead over Labour; the Tories gained the Cleveland PCC from Labour in the first round, Steve Turner enjoying a 54-29 lead over Labour; the Conservatives gained the Hartlepool parliamentary by-election, which was not close; all 13 Conservative candidates for the all-out council election in Hartlepool were elected, making them the largest party against 12 independents and 11 Labour councillors (it would appear that most of the clowns have now left the circus); and they won all ten local by-elections in the area, gaining Red Hall and Lingfield ward in Darlington from Labour, Billingham West ward in Stockton from independents and Bishopsgarth and Elm Tree ward in Stockton from the Lib Dems.  The new Tory councillors for those wards are David Willis, Lee Spence and Hugo Stratton respectively.  Interestingly the Greens had a go at the Darlington by-election in Hummersknott ward, normally a safe Conservative area, but they fell short.

<h2>North West</h2>

The Conservatives held the Cumbria CC position in the first round, polling 54% against 26% for Labour and 20% for the Lib Dems.

With the cancellation of Cumbria's county and district council elections there were only by-elections to look forward to.  Three of these were for Carlisle city council, and the Conservatives gained two of them: the marginal Harraby South and Parklands and the previously safe-Labour ward of Newtown and Morton North.  Neville Lishman is the new councillor there.  Those two gains mean that the Conservative minority administration in Carlisle is much more secure: they now have nineteen seats, just one short of a majority.

A flurry of by-elections in Allerdale has left the council finely balanced.  The Conservatives held their marginal seat in Seaton and Northside ward, and gained seats from Labour in Christchurch, and Ellen and Gilcrux wards, but they lost Aspatria (a defection gain) to independent candidate Kevin Thurlow.  The remaining district by-election in St John's ward saw Labour pick up a seat which had previously been held by an independent.  That leaves Allerdale council with 18 Conservatives, 18 independents and 13 Labour councillors and a Conservative minority administration.

The Conservatives also made two county council gains in Allerdale.  Candidate Debbie Garton picked up the independent-held seat in St John's and Great Clifton division, defeating Labour by 18 votes; while the Lib Dems finished third in their defence of Cockermouth North.

However, the Tories didn't have it all their own way on the county council, with the Ulverston West by-election going to the Green Party's Judy Filmore.  Elsewhere in South Lakeland, the Conservatives lost the by-election in Broughton and Coniston ward which was picked up by the Lib Dems.

Over the sands in Lancashire, the Police and Crime Commissionership was a gain for the Conservatives whose candidate Andrew Snowden defeated Labour's Clive Grunshaw 51-49 in the runoff.  The Conservatives increased their majority on the county council, which now stands at 48 Conservatives, 32 Labour, 2 Lib Dems and 2 Greens.  They also picked up by-elections in Norbreck ward, Blackpool (from an independent) and Kellet ward, Lancaster (from the Lib Dems).

Some MRP-based polling before the election had suggested that Labour might win a majority on Burnley council with Hyndburn going hung.  This would have required Labour to gain seats in Burnley at the same time as the Tories taking a clean sweep in Hyndburn, which seemed unlikely at best given that the two towns are demographically very similar.  And indeed "no change" was the outcome in those two boroughs.  Burnley is now more hung than it was before, with 18 Labour councillors, 9 Conservatives, 8 Lib Dems, 5 Greens and 5 localists; the Tories did gain four seats in Hyndburn, but Labour are still comfortably in control with 22 seats against 12 Conservatives and an independent who has broken the borough's two-party duopoly.  All of Pendle council was up for election and the Conservatives are back in control there with 18 councillors to 10 Labour and 5 Lib Dems.  As I suggested, Rossendale council is now hung although Labour still hold half of the seats.

https://youtu.be/B3KBajUoEjo

There wasn't much change in Blackburn with Darwen, but the election of the Tories' Tiger Patel (whose campaign video, above, went viral during the campaign) has already resulted in an improvement for his Audley and Queen's Park constituents.  The broken swings in the video have now been fixed.  Despite an all-out election being held the Tories failed to make much headway in Chorley which now has a 29-13 Labour lead.  More gains for Our West Lancashire, and a surprise Labour loss to an independent in Skelmersdale, mean that West Lancashire council is now hung: Labour have 26 seats, the Conservatives have 20 and the OWLs and independents have 8.

Merseyside didn't see many shocks, although Labour put in an embarrassing performance in the Mayor of Liverpool election.  Joanne Anderson (no relation of Big Joe) polled just 38% of the first preferences across the city and was taken to a runoff against independent candidate Stephen Yip, although she did win that runoff easily.  By contrast, Steve Rotheram was re-elected as Mayor of the Liverpool City region in the first round with 58%, and Labour's Emily Spurrell is the new Merseyside PCC with 57% of the vote in the first round.  Wirral council remains hung with Labour losing three seats to the Greens and one to the Conservatives; the council now stands at 30 Labour councillors, 23 Conservatives, 6 Lib Dems, 5 Greens and 2 independents (who if I recall correctly were elected as Labour).

The rematch between the Tories' John Dwyer and Labour's David Keane for the Cheshire PCC position resulted in a gain for Dwyer, who won the runoff 53-47.  The other main change in Cheshire is that the Conservatives have become the main opposition on Warrington council, which now has 36 Labour councillors, 11 Conservatives, 8 Lib Dems and 3 independents.

Andy Burnham was re-elected as mayor of Greater Manchester with a whopping 67-20 lead over the Conservative candidate Laura Burns and a majority of over 335,000 votes.  The bus companies had better watch out.  Paul Dennett was re-elected as mayor of Salford in the first round with a 59-23 lead over the Tories' Arnie Saunders, who was re-elected to the council in his renamed ward of Kersal and Broughton Park.  Saunders is a prominent rabbi and Kersal and Broughton Park is the most Jewish ward in England; however, the Tories' tactic of running a religiously balanced slate of two Jews and a Muslim there backfired as the voters elected the two Jewish Tory candidates and a Jewish Lib Dem, giving the Liberal Democrats their first Salford council win since 2008.

Over the border in Bury, the Conservatives also lost the strongly-Jewish ward of Sedgley (in Prestwich) and failed to gain Unsworth.  The ruling Labour party lost Elton ward to the Tories and all three wards in Radcliffe, but gained Sedgley and Ramsbottom and held St Mary's ward in Prestwich to stay in control of Bury council with a majority of one seat.

The Conservatives have consolidated their position as the largest party on Bolton council, winning nine of the borough's twenty wards to equal the record they set (on the current boundaries) in 2008.  Bolton council now stands at 21 Conservative councillors, 19 Labour, 14 localists, 5 Lib Dems and a UKIP councillor.  The Conservative minority administration should continue.

Despite a dubious performance in Oldham where the council leader lost his seat, the worst news for Labour in the 2021 Greater Manchester elections came from Stockport where the Liberal Democrats are now the largest party.  Stockport council now stands at 26 Lib Dems, 25 Labour, 8 Conservatives, 3 Heald Green residents and one Green Party councillor.  The Lib Dems look set to take over the council leadership from Labour and form a minority administration.

<h2>Yorkshire and the Humber</h2>

Labour's Tracy Brabin is the new Mayor of West Yorkshire, defeating the Tories' Matt Robinson by a 60-40 margin in the runoff.  This will have consequences: Brabin has resigned her seat in Parliament, and a by-election will be held for the Batley and Spen constituency in due course.

Batley and Spen is the northern constituency covering the Kirklees metropolitan district, which remains hung following the elections.  There are now 33 Labour councillors, 19 Conservatives, 9 Lib Dems, 3 Greens and 5 independents of various hues.  The Conservatives had a very good election in Wakefield, gaining six wards including parts of the old coalfield, but Labour remain firmly in control there as they are in the other three West Yorkshire boroughs.

Sheffield city council has fallen into no overall control after another bad performance by Labour who lost eight seats to the Greens and Lib Dems.  The council now stands at 41 Labour councillors, 29 Lib Dems, 13 Greens and a Conservative - that's the first council seat the Conservatives have won in Sheffield since 2004.  In 2004 the Tory ward was middle-class Dore and Totley; this year they gained the isolated steelworking ward of Stocksbridge and Upper Don from UKIP.  The results in neighbouring Barnsley this year weren't as wacky as those in 2019, but again we have a Conservative win in unusual territory for them: the Tories and Labour tied for first place in Rockingham ward, with the Conservatives winning the drawing of lots.  Hopefully they celebrated their Rockingham win with some wine gums.

https://youtu.be/wioh5qUj7fM

There were big changes on Rotherham council, which returned a much-reduced Labour majority.  Labour now have 32 councillors, the Conservatives (who didn't have a single seat before the election) are now the main opposition on 20, the independent ex-UKIP group held just 4 of their seats and the Lib Dems won 3.  The Labour mayor of Doncaster Ros Jones was taken to a runoff but was easily re-elected with a 60-40 margin over the Conservatives.  Alan Billings was re-elected as the Labour PCC for South Yorkshire in the first round.

In North Yorkshire there was almost a clean sweep for the Conservatives, with Philip Allott winning the PCC with a 61-39 margin over Labour in the runoff and the Tories sweeping all but one of the local by-elections.  They gained a county council seat in Harrogate Bilton and Nidd Gorge from the Lib Dems, and picked up the open seat on Selby council vacated by the Yorkshire Party.  The one that got away was the Barden Fell by-election to Craven council, where independent councillor David Pighills was re-elected in the by-election caused by his own disqualification under the six-month non-attendance rule.

Having only been selected at the last possible moment, the Conservatives' Jonathan Evison is now the Humberside Police and Crime Commissioner.  He gained the position from Labour's Keith Hunter by a 53-47 margin.  There was more good news for the local Conservatives, whose candidate Joanne Saunby gained a by-election in the previously safe-Labour Ashby ward of Scunthorpe, while the party held the other by-elections they were defending in North Lincolnshire and the East Riding and greatly increased their majority on North East Lincolnshire council.  The Labour majority on Hull city council is now down to three seats: they have 30 councillors against 26 Lib Dems and one Conservative.

<h2>East Midlands</h2>

In the East Midlands PCC elections the Conservatives scored a clean sweep.  They convincingly gained Derbyshire from Labour, winning the runoff 56-44; gained Leicestershire from Labour by the even more convincing margin of 57-43; held Lincolnshire and Northamptonshire in the first round; and gained Nottinghamshire from Labour by 51.4-48.6.

Nottinghamshire county council now has a Conservative overall majority, with 37 seats against 15 Labour, 13 independents (most of whom are Zadroznyite) and a Lib Dem.  The party performed particularly well in Bassetlaw, where the Labour group leader on the county council lost his Worksop North seat; the Conservatives also picked up two open seats in by-elections to Bassetlaw council.  Ben Bradley, the Tory MP for Mansfield, will take over as leader of the county council.

In Derbyshire a Conservative administration was re-elected for the first time as the party increased its majority.  As I suggested Labour gained seats in High Peak, where Ruth George defeated Edwina Currie in the Whaley Bridge battle of ex-MPs, but they lost all their county seats in Amber Valley and performed badly in the Bolsover district.  The new council has 45 Conservative councillors against 14 Labour, 4 Lib Dems and a Green.

The Conservatives also gained Derbyshire's Amber Valley council directly from Labour, with Labour holding only two of the wards they were defending.  Amber Valley now stands at 28 Conservatives, 16 Labour and a Green.  In the county's local by-elections the Conservatives gained four wards from Labour: Masson ward in Derbyshire Dales (by three votes), the Hallam Fields ward of Ilkeston and the Nottingham Road ward of Long Eaton, both in Erewash district (Nottingham Road was a safe ward taken by the Conservatives' Bryn Lewis), and the Eckington South and Renishaw by-election in North East Derbyshire district.  There is one bright spot for Derbyshire Labour amidst this wreckage: following a by-election gain from an independent in Pinxton ward, they now have overall control of Bolsover council.

In by-elections in Lincolnshire and Leicestershire the Conservatives gained Bassingham and Brant Broughton ward in North Kesteven from the Lincolnshire independents, Skirbeck ward in Boston town from an independent, and Ibstock East ward in North West Leicestershire from Labour.  North West Leicestershire council also had a by-election in Worthington and Breedon ward for the longest-standing vacancy in the UK's local government, the previous Conservative councillor having died in November 2019; it's fitting that this was one of the first results to come through on Thursday night.

The two new Northamptonshire councils delivered large Conservative majorities.  North Northamptonshire has 60 Conservative seats against 14 Labour, 3 Greens and an independent; West Northamptonshire's ruling Tory group will have 66 seats opposed by 20 Labour, 5 Lib Dems and two independents.

<h2>West Midlands</h2>

The standout story in the West Midlands is the re-election of the Conservative West Midlands mayor Andy Street, the former chairman of the John Lewis Partnership. Street nearly won on first preferences, with a 49-40 lead over Labour's Liam Byrne MP; Byrne narrowed the margin to 54-46 in the runoff, but that was too far behind to come back from.  Clearly the West Midlands' voters really like John Lewis.  The West Midlands Police and Crime Commissioner election, with the same boundaries and the same franchise, returned the same 54-46 margin - but for Labour's Simon Foster.

The good performance by Andy Street was mirrored by good Conservative performances in the Black Country.  They gained 12 seats on the hung Dudley council, with Labour holding only three of the wards they were defending, to take a large majority of 46-24 (with two independent councillors).  The Tories increased their majority in Walsall, made significant gains in Wolverhampton and broke through in Sandwell where the Labour monopoly has been broken: Sandwell now has 58 Labour councillors, 9 Conservatives, 4 independents and one vacant seat.  Two of the Birmingham by-elections, in Oscott and Quinton wards, also fell to the Conservatives.

In Nuneaton and Bedworth, which was hung before the elections, the Conservatives gained ten seats and now have an overall majority with 24 councillors against just seven for Labour, two independents and a Green.  Six of the seven Labour councillors are up for re-election next year - can they afford another year like this?  The Conservatives also gained two seats from Labour in by-elections to North Warwickshire council.

There was another bloodbath for Labour in Staffordshire.  The party held only four seats on the county council, and lost every seat they were defending on Cannock Chase council which now has a Conservative majority for the first time.  The Conservatives gained four by-elections, two from independents in Cheadle, one from Labour in Brownhills and one from Labour in the Moorcroft ward of Stoke-on-Trent.  The only bright spot for Staffordshire Labour was that they gained a seat from an independent in the Eton Park by-election to East Staffordshire council, in one of the grottier parts of Burton upon Trent.

To the south of Birmingham, the Conservatives won a clean sweep of all nine seats up for election in Redditch, gaining seven seats from Labour.  Redditch council now stands at 25 Conservatives and just four for Labour - fewer Labour councillors than neighbouring Bromsgrove.  Worcester council now has a Conservative majority, although the all-party administration might well continue there.  Despite losing six seats in Shropshire, including that of the council leader, the Conservatives remain in control there; and elsewhere in the Marches they picked up by-elections in the Donnington ward of Telford (from Labour) and the Newton Farm ward of Hereford (from an independent).

The three PCC elections here outside the West Midlands metropolitan area (Warwickshire, Staffordshire and West Mercia) were all Conservative holds in the first round.

<h2>South West</h2>

As we now enter the south of England, the story of the 2021 local elections starts to change.  Whereas the North and Midlands were characterised by Conservative gains, the South was a much more patchy picture.  We can see this in Gloucestershire, where the Conservatives lost three seats on the county council and only narrowly remain in control: they have 28 seats against 16 Lib Dems, 5 Labour and 4 Greens.  Gloucester council is listed by the BBC as a Conservative gain from No Overall Control, but it was only hung because two of the previous Tory seats were vacant; the Conservatives benefited from a Labour collapse here to increase their majority.  Stroud council remains hung with the Green Party having made significant gains; the Labour-Green-Lib Dem coalition may well continue here.  There was good news for the Tories in the Gloucestershire PCC contest: the independent outgoing PCC Martin Hurl finished third, and the Conservatives beat the Lib Dems 60-40 in the runoff.

Eleven years after losing his seat in the House of Commons to Jacob Rees-Mogg, Labour's Dan Norris is back on the frontline of politics as the new mayor of the West of England.  He led in the first round with 33% against 29% for the Conservatives, 22% for the Green Party and 16% for the Lib Dems, and ran away with the transfers to win the runoff by a 60-40 margin.  Norris' win owes a lot to a good performance in Bristol, whose Labour mayor Marvin Rees was re-elected; he led on the first round with 36% against 26% for the Greens, 19% for the Conservatives and 11% for the Liberal Democrats, and went on to beat the Greens 56-44 in the runoff.  However, Rees will have to work hard to get his programme through Bristol city council after the Greens made significant gains there: the new Bristol council has 24 Labour councillors against 24 Greens, 14 Conservatives and 8 Lib Dems, and all 24 Labour councillors will have to vote to avoid the council reaching the two-thirds majority needed to block the mayor's budget.

There was better news for the Bristol Conservatives, in that they gained the post of Avon and Somerset Police and Crime Commissioner from independent PCC Sue Mountstevens who didn't seek re-election.  The Tories' Mark Shelford led in the first round with 35% against 24% for Labour, 16% for the Greens and 13% for the Lib Dems; Labour picked up most of the transfers but were too far behind, and Shelford won the runoff 52-48.  The Conservatives also picked up the by-election in the Wells St Thomas' ward of Mendip council, gaining the seat from the Lib Dems who messed up their nomination papers and failed to get on the ballot.

This column is going to have to come back to Wiltshire very soon as we have <em>already</em> had the ludicrous Police and Crime Commissioner by-election rules triggered.  Jonathan Seed, the Conservative candidate for PCC who won the runoff 63-37 against the Lib Dems, is ineligible for that office due to a previous drink-driving conviction.  He will have to settle for being one of the 61-strong ruling Conservative group on Wiltshire council - that's a loss of seven seats in 2017, although boundary changes make it difficult to pinpoint exactly which seats have changed hands.  By contrast the Conservatives increased their majority in Swindon, whose council now stands at 36 Conservatives, 20 Labour and an independent ex-Conservative who has resigned from the council since the election.

The Dorset PCC election went to a runoff between the Conservatives' David Sidwick and independent Dan Hardy, who had the endorsement of the previous independent PCC.  Sidwick won the runoff by 62-38.  The Conservatives gained the safe Lib Dem ward of Canford Heath at a by-election to Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole council, shoring up the Conservative minority administration which remains two seats short of a majority.

The Conservatives held the Devon and Cornwall PCC election very comfortably indeed, beating Labour 65-35 in the runoff.  This comes off the back of a good result in Plymouth where they gained six seats from Labour and are now the largest party; the city council stands at 26 Conservative councillors, 24 Labour and 7 seats for a Tory splinter group.  There should be enough votes here for the Conservatives to form an administration to run Plymouth.  In Devon by-elections the Conservatives picked up an open seat on East Devon council in Whimple and Rockbeare ward, and gained two seats on Mid Devon council in Tiverton's Castle and Westexe wards (from the Lib Dems and an independent respectively).

The Tories also took back control of Cornwall council from a Lib Dem-Independent coalition.  Cornwall now has a small Tory majority with 47 seats, against 16 independents, 13 Lib Dems, five Labour, five seats for the Cornish nationalist party Mebyon Kernow, and a Green councillor.  Britain's smallest principal council by population, the Council of the Isles of Scilly, is non-partisan.

<h2>Eastern</h2>

The ordinary elections in Norfolk saw little change, but the by-elections were another matter.  The Conservatives won all four of them, gaining two seats in Great Yarmouth (Claydon ward from Labour, the open Ormesby ward from an independent) and picking up a Lib Dem seat in the Coastal ward of North Norfolk.  This column is scheduled to return to Norfolk next month to cover the contests in the Sewell division of the county council and the Sewell ward of Norwich city council, which were postponed after the Conservative candidate died.

Over the border in Suffolk the Conservatives did well in Ipswich this year, gaining six seats; however, Labour still have a comfortable majority there.  The Tories improved their position on West Suffolk council, gaining the Lakenheath by-election from an independent and confirming a defection gain from an independent councillor in the Moreton Hall ward of Bury St Edmunds.

Cambridgeshire, on the other hand, provided one of the sensations of the election with the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough mayoralty.  On the first count the outgoing Conservative mayor James Palmer led with 41% of the vote against 33% for Labour's Nik Johnson and 27% for the Lib Dems' Aidan van der Weyer, but the Lib Dem transfers went strongly to Johnson giving him a 51.3-48.7 win in the runoff.  Nik Johnson's election as Mayor of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough means he has vacated his seat on Huntingdonshire council, and Andrew's Previews will be back to cover the resulting by-election in St Neots in due course.

The Conservatives also lost control of Cambridgeshire county council thanks to the Liberal Democrats winning all but two of the county seats in the South Cambridgeshire district, which surrounds the city of Cambridge and includes all the villages in the city's hinterland; as such it's full of people associated with Cambridge's universities who are very annoyed at a number of the current government's policies.  When I draft the annual megapreviews there always seems to be one district that gets accidentally left out, and this year I'm afraid it was South Cambridgeshire: there were four by-elections to the district council on 6th May, with the Liberal Democrats gaining Girton ward from an independent councillor, and holding the wards of Harston and Comberton, Melbourn, and Milton and Waterbeach.  My apologies for not mentioning these in Part III of the 6th May Preview.

Cambridgeshire county council doesn't include the city of Peterborough, which saw very little change this year.  The Tories did manage to hold on to the Cambridgeshire PCC, but only by 53-47 in the runoff over Labour.

To the south, the county of Essex presents a mixed picture.  To start at the eastern end in Tendring district, the Conservatives picked up the open seat left behind by UKIP in West Clacton and Jaywick Sands ward, while the Holland-on-Sea and Eastcliff Matters group lost Eastcliff ward to an independent candidate.  Neighbouring Colchester remains hung with very little nett change: the current rainbow coalition of Lib Dems, Labour and independents may well be joined by the Green Party which won its first seat on the council.

The Conservatives struck back in Chelmsford district, gaining the Moulsham Lodge by-election from the Lib Dems.  Things were different in neighbouring Maldon, which now officially has an independent majority following an independent gain from the Conservatives in the Tollesbury by-election.  In Uttlesford district in the north of the county, the ruling Residents for Uttlesford group recovered a seat in Newport ward which they had lost to defection, but lost a by-election to the Conservatives in The Sampfords ward.

The South Essex councils were a mixed bunch.  The Tories did well in the hung council of Southend-on-Sea, but they were facing a difficult map this year and an overall majority was never likely.  Neighbouring Castle Point is suddenly on a knife-edge after an independent group gained three seats on the mainland in Benfleet; with Canvey Island in the hands of a localist party, the council now stands at 21 Conservative councillors against 20 independents and localists.  The Conservatives confirmed their majority in Thurrock and gained control of Basildon council, which had previously been run by Labour and a number of independent groups.

The standout result for the Essex Conservatives, however, was that in Harlow where they won ten of the borough's eleven wards and gained the council from Labour.  The Tories have done the clean sweep of Harlow's county seats on a number of occasions, but in an even year the district ward boundaries tend to concentrate Conservative voters in four safe wards so this is an even more impressive performance than it looks.  The new Harlow council has 20 Conservative councillors, 12 Labour and one vacant seat.

Over in Hertfordshire we saw a similarly impressive Conservative result in Welwyn Hatfield district.  The Tories had been underperforming here in the last electoral cycle, but unexpectedly won 14 of the 16 wards up for election with Labour wiped out.  The new council has 28 Conservative councillors, 11 Lib Dems and 9 Labour.

Hertfordshire also includes the only council where the Liberal Democrats gained majority control this year: St Albans, where they picked up all the seats Labour were defending and broke through in the traditionally-Tory town of Harpenden.  The new St Albans council has 30 Lib Dem councillors, 23 Conservatives, 2 independents, 2 Labour and a Green.  These gains were reflected at county council level too, but the Conservatives are still in control of Hertfordshire county council with a reduced majority of 46 out of 78 seats.  The only local by-election in Hertfordshire to result in a seat change was another Conservative loss: Labour gained the Hertsmere ward of Borehamwood Brookmeadow.

The Conservatives held all the Police and Crime Commissioner contests in the Eastern region, including Bedfordshire where there were no local elections apart from two by-elections to Luton council.  The Liberal Democrats gained the Round Green by-election from Labour, who held the High Town by-election.

<h2>South East</h2>

For our final region in this review of the 6th May elections, we start with a Conservative win in the brand-new Buckinghamshire council.  The ruling Conservative group here is the largest outside of the House of Commons, with 113 (count em!) councillors; the opposition is made up of 15 Lib Dems, 14 independents, 4 Labour and a Green councillor.  On the previous Buckinghamshire county council the Conservatives held 41 out of 49 seats; the new council is three times the size of the old, so 113 councillors, while an impressively large number, is ten seats behind the Conservatives' notional performance four years ago.  Andrew's Previews will travel to Buckinghamshire in the near future for the parliamentary by-election in Chesham and Amersham, for which I hope to be able to offer more coherent analysis.

The best Conservative result in the Thames Valley police area came in the new city of Milton Keynes, where they gained six seats and are now the largest party again.  The new MK council has 24 Conservative councillors, 19 Labour, 13 Lib Dems and an independent.  Although they held the relevant by-election in Woughton and Fishermead without fuss, Labour's campaign in Milton Keynes will not have been helped by an entry for the Councillors Behaving Badly file: former Labour councillor Shammi Akter had resigned in February 2021 after receiving an eight-month suspended sentence for child neglect.  Labour run a minority administration in MK which the Conservatives may now attempt to overturn.

The Conservatives also did well to lose only one seat in the Cherwell district of northern Oxfordshire, given the carnage that took place on the county council.  The 2013 and 2017 results had left the Conservatives one seat away from an overall majority; this year they lost nine seats to leave the county council at 22 Conservatives, 21 Lib Dems, 15 Labour, 3 Greens and 2 independents.  This Conservative total includes a gain from Labour in Banbury Ruscote division, where it appears that the Tory candidate was wrongly declared elected after the Conservative and Labour vote totals were accidentally transposed.  Labour have indicated that they will go to the Election Court to have the result overturned.  More news on that as we get it.

Despite the general Tory bloodbath in southern Oxfordshire the party did gain two by-elections in that area: Didcot North East (in South Oxfordshire district) from an independent and Grove North (in Vale of White Horse district) from the Lib Dems.  The Conservatives also did well enough to hold onto West Oxfordshire and Wokingham districts, although they are still losing seats in those areas.

In Hampshire the Conservatives impressively won control of Southampton city council, gaining seven wards from Labour to take a 25-23 lead.  However, on the Tory side this was offset by the loss of Isle of Wight council which is now hung, with 18 Conservative councillors, 17 independents, and 2 Greens, 1 Labour and 1 Lib Dem councillor holding the balance of power.  The Conservatives are now again the largest party on the hung Portsmouth council after the ruling Lib Dems lost two seats: the Tories now have 16 seats there, the Lib Dems 15, and there are 7 Labour and four independent councillors.  The other hung council in Hampshire is the Hart district, based on Fleet and surrounding towns on the M3 corridor, where the ruling Lib Dem-Community Campaign coalition lost a seat to the Conservatives.

On the local by-election front, the Conservatives gained two seats in Test Valley council from a now-collapsed Andover localist party.  The St Michael ward of Winchester was the last ordinary district council ward to declare its result: it was originally supposed to be counted on Friday, but was delayed until Saturday due to a fire alarm at the count venue, and the count then had to be adjourned until Monday after a recount was requested.

The performance of the Surrey Conservatives was nothing to write home out, given the high expectations psephologists have of them.  Following three Liberal Democrat gains in Woking the Conservative minority administration there is now in trouble, the new council is finely balanced with 13 Conservatives, 12 Lib Dems, 3 Labour and 2 independent councillors.  The Tories remain in control of Surrey county council but lost fourteen seats: the new council has 47 Conservatives against 16 Residents and independents, 14 Lib Dems, and two each from the Greens and Labour.  There was good news for the Conservatives in Surrey's local by-elections: they gained Staines South ward in Spelthorne district and Bagshot ward in Surrey Heath district, both from the Liberal Democrats.

In Sussex, the strange situation in Crawley has not been resolved.  Labour did rather better here than a few other New Towns we have covered, as they held their losses to one seat: the new Crawley council is finely balanced at 18 Conservatives, 17 Labour and one ex-Labour independent.  I indicated in the Preview that Labour were on course for major seat gains in Worthing, and they delivered on that: the Conservatives now have a majority of one on the council, with 19 Conservative councillors against 15 Labour and 3 Lib Dems.

This poor Conservative performance wasn't repeated in the coastal districts outside Worthing.  In Arun district the Tories gained two by-elections from the Liberal Democrats (one in Littlehampton, the other in Bognor Regis) to improve their position as the largest party, and they may now make another attempt to depose the minority Lib Dem administration.  In Adur district, based on Shoreham-by-Sea between Worthing and Brighton, the collapse of UKIP was to the benefit of the Conservatives who increased their majority.  Other local by-elections saw the Conservatives gain a seat in Mid Sussex from an independent in Copthorne and Worth ward.

The ruling Conservatives lost seats on both Sussex county councils, with Labour the main beneficiaries in West Sussex and the Greens breaking through in East Sussex.  East Sussex county council is now very close with 27 Conservative councillors, 11 Lib Dems, 5 Labour, 4 Greens and 3 independents.  The Greens also performed well in two by-elections in Brighton, picking up Hollingdean and Stanmer ward from Labour to shore up their minority administration on Brighton and Hove council.  Other by-elections in East Sussex saw the Liberal Democrats gain the Hailsham North ward of Wealden council from the Conservatives.

The main story in Kent comes from Tunbridge Wells, where the Conservatives have lost another six seats and control of the council.  There are 24 Tory councillors left, half of the council. against 13 Lib Dems, 6 Labour, 5 members of the Tunbridge Wells Alliance and an independent.

The other Kent district council up for election this year was Maidstone, where by contrast an excellent Conservative performance saw them gain five seats and a majority of the council.  Maidstone now stands at 29 Conservatives, 17 Lib Dems, 5 independents and 4 Labour councillors.

Thanet council might also see a change in control following three by-elections.  The Conservatives gained Newington ward in Ramsgate from Labour and Dane Valley ward from the ex-UKIP Thanet Independents, while Labour lost Central Harbour ward in Thanet to the Green Party.  Thanet council now has 27 Conservative councillors, 17 Labour, 6 Thanet Independents, 4 Greens and 2 other independents, with the leadership currently vacant and to be decided at a full council meeting this week.  Other Kent local by-elections saw four more Conservative gains from Labour: Beaver ward in Ashford, Mill Hill ward in Deal (Dover council), Westcourt ward in Gravesham and Sheerness ward in Swale.

That completes our review of what changed in the May 2021 local elections.  This was a marathon in every sense, and an enormous vote of thanks is due to all the people who made these elections happen: the hard-pressed returning officers, electoral services teams and poll staff recruited and employed by our local councils.  They have had a horrible job to do this year, and (with the possible exception of the deputy returning officer for Cherwell district) have performed it with the high standards we have come to expect.  Thank you.  Thank you all.

Thanks are also due to those who participated: the candidates, and the voters.  I had been asked before the election whether I thought that turnout would fall as a result of public health restrictions; based on what had been happening in the Scottish and Welsh local by-elections I never believed this would happen, and indeed the final reckoning is that turnout has generally been at or above the average for these types of election.  The Scottish Parliament elections had the highest turnout on record, with more electors casting votes in Scotland than in London.

The district councillors elected this year, the police and crime commissioners, and most of the combined authority mayors will serve short terms of only three years and will be due for re-election in 2024.  This is so that we can get back to the electoral cycle which we had before democracy paused in March 2020.  May 2024 is also the scheduled date of the next general election, so the administrators' nightmare may well be repeated on steroids in three years' time.  Watch this space.

In the meantime, for the first time since the winter of 2019-20 your columnist can now finally see the bottom of the list of future council vacancies.  That feels <em>so</em> good.  The only dates scheduled at the moment are for the two postponed polls in Norwich and a forthcoming by-election in Aberdeenshire, which will take place on 17th June, and Andrew's Previews will return then.  Before that, we have this week's parliamentary by-election in Airdrie and Shotts for which there is a separate Parliamentary Special preview.  I hope you will join me for those polls, and after a short recovery period from these elections I look forward to restarting Andrew's Previews in earnest, to once again bring you all the right votes - but not necessarily in the right order.  Stay tuned.

<em>Andrew Teale</em>
