Four by-elections happen on Thursday 26th July to round off the month.  After last week's visit to Attleborough we return for two further by-elections to Norfolk's Breckland district council, and there is a by-election to one of the most unusual and controversial local government districts in England, which is also the scene of some of England's most confusing and impenetrable local politics.  But before we get to that election in Stoke-on-Trent, there's a poll to dissect in the City of London.


FARRINGDON WITHIN, City of London Corporation; caused by the resignation of Common Councilman Robert Hughes-Penney.

The ancient City of London.  The Square Mile.  These days the heart of Britain's financial power, where fortunes are daily made and lost (these last few years, more often lost).  The 1801 census found around 130,000 people living within the Roman walls; on census day in 2011 there were only 7,400 people living in the City but over 300,000 working there.

A city as important and chaotic as London of course needs an administration.  No-one knows just how far back the City Corporation goes, but William the Conqueror gave it a Royal Charter in 1067, the first Lord Mayor of London was installed in or around 1189, and the council - the Court of Common Council - has been going since at least 1376.  The current Lord Mayor of London, David Wootton, is a former Common Councilman for this ward; he is not to be confused with the elected Mayor of London, Boris Johnson, who you will probably see at the Olympic Games opening ceremony on Friday.

The City of London has managed to escape every major reform of local government over the last 200 years: the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 left it alone because its franchise was wider than any other city or borough; the creation of the County of London and the London Metropolitan Boroughs in 1888 didn't affect the City, neither did the creation of the GLC and the London Boroughs in 1965.  The City even retains the business vote, which was abolished for all other UK local elections in 1969; the business vote was actually expanded as part of reforms in 2002 and dwarfs the residents' vote.  The result of all this is that the City is a unique local government institution with nothing else like it in Britain, never mind the world.

The City's 25 wards are still based on their mediaeval predecessors.  Farringdon Within ward is actually one of the youngest wards, dating from 1394 when the old Farringdon ward was split into two having become too large and unweildy; Farringdon Within is still one of the largest wards in the City, with its 1500 voters (mostly business voters but with some residents) returning eight of the 100 Common Councilmen.  Most of Farringdon Within's residential voters are legal types who work in the Temple district or nurses at St Bartholomew's Hospital (one of the many London institutions owned and/or funded by the City).

The Farringdon Within ward covers two distinct areas which are effectively detached from each other.  The larger southern part is based around City Thameslink railway station and the streets of Black Friars Lane and Old Bailey; the latter street gives its name to the Central Criminal Court, where many of the UK's most notorious criminals have been tried.  Opposite the Old Bailey is the Merrill Lynch financial centre, which will presumably supply a large number of business voters.  The northern part of the ward is bounded by Montague Street, Aldersgate Street, Charterhouse Street, Hayne Street, Long Lane and another street whose name has become famous in another context, Little Britain; it is served by the Barbican underground station.

The City is the only UK local government district not covered by the Local Elections Archive Project: this is because City elections are entirely non-partisan affairs (although there was a slate of Labour candidates at the last election in 2009, who polled very poorly).  The by-election has attracted four independent candidates, although one of them (Mark Clarke, from Tooting) is a former Conservative parliamentary candidate who appears to be campaigning hard on local issues - perhaps too hard, given the predominantly business nature of the electorate.  The establishment candidate is Trevor Brignall, from Stevenage, who is a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Marketors and heavily involved in City charitable work.  Also standing are Spencer Marshall, who gives an address in South Norwood and appears to be the man behind the facilities management company of the same name; and Bryn Phillips, a community organiser from Homerton who is unlikely to get many votes from the business electorate because of his involvement in the Occupy movement; he is currently awaiting trial charged with violent disorder.

Parliamentary constituency: Cities of London and Westminster
ONS Travel to Work Area: London

Trevor James BRIGNALL, 123 Chancellors Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 4TZ [Independent]
Mark Adrian CLARKE, 13a Lucien Road, London SW17 8HS
Spencer MARSHALL, 34 Merton Road, London SE25 5ND [Independent]
Bryn David PHILLIPS, Flat 67, Gascoyne House, Gascoyne Road, London E9 7BJ


SPRINGFIELDS AND TRENT VALE, Stoke-on-Trent city council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Sarah Hill, for reasons which will be discussed below.

From the sublime to the ridiculous.  The City of London gets a lot of controversy based on its continuing use of the business franchise, but this is as nothing compared to what has happened with Stoke-on-Trent city council over the last decade.

The council was one of the first areas to vote for an elected mayor, the first one being independent candidate Mike Wolfe, elected after the 2002 elections delivered a majority for independent candidates.  Stoke was the only council to be run under the now-abolished 'mayor and council manager' system, which placed all executive power in the hands of the mayor and the Chief Executive.  Wolfe lost the mayoralty to Labour in the 2005 election, after which the fun really started.

The number of councillors who defected between political groups in Stoke is so large I have completely lost track of what was going on there.  I think that at one stage there were splinter groups of splinter groups on the council.  The annual election results were just as bizarre, as the following graphic makes clear:
[Tom, can you please insert at this point http://i40.tinypic.com/20sh8nk.gif]
The 2008 Stoke election bears close examination as possibly one of the worst election results Britain's first-past-the-post electoral system has ever delivered.  Labour topped the poll with 25.1% and won four of the twenty wards; however, the City Independents won the most seats, five, on just 12.8% of the vote while finishing fifth in the popular vote behind Labour, the Conservatives (2 seats, 17.4%), independent candidates (4 seats, 17.2%) and the BNP (3 seats, 14.3%).  Seventeen of the twenty wards were won by a different party compared to the previous term in 2004, and just four councillors were re-elected (one of them being a defector under his new colours).  Five defectors stood for re-election under their new colours, a quarter of the council's Class of 2004.  In keeping with the bizarre nature of the election, Labour actually gained two wards while near the low point of their national popularity.

All this infighting will sound wearily familiar to those who are aware of the very similar case of Anglesey council, which I covered two weeks ago.  Anglesey ended up having all its executive power taken away from the councillors and is getting radically new electoral arrangements with a reduced number of councillors to try and shake the elections up a bit.  Stoke has had similar medicine delivered to it, with 60 councillors elected by thirds from twenty multi-member wards reduced in 2011 to 43 councillors elected every four years from predominantly single-member wards.  The first elections under these new arrangements were held last year and saw Labour win a large majority.

Whether the large majority Labour now enjoy in Stoke has put to bed the council's previous problems is rather a moot point, when you consider the circumstances which brought about this week's by-election in Springfields and Trent Vale ward (yes, I am finally getting to the point of this preview).  Essentially, Labour councillor Sarah Hill challenged Mohammed Pervez for the group leadership in May, got trounced in the leadership election and then decided that if she couldn't be Leader she didn't want to be on the council any longer.

Sarah Hill's old ward, Springfields and Trent Vale, is essentially the southern end of Stoke-upon-Trent proper, inside the D-road and stretching along the A34 Stone Road and Newcastle Road.  Much of the actual pottery industry in the area is now gone, so a significant proportion of the ward's economy is derived from the city council itself whose newish Civic Centre is in the centre of Stoke-upon-Trent, easily visible from the west side of Virgin's London-bound trains as they accelerate out of Stoke station towards London.  However, that building may not be the home of the council for much longer, as the council is proposing to relocate to Hanley in an effort to redevelop that area.

I am grateful to Tim Mullen for extensive help with background information on the nine candidates for this by-election, a list which reads like the bad old days before 2011 and exposes a lot of the old tensions.  At the top of the ballot paper is the defending Labour candidate Mubsira Aumir, a mother-of-three and primary school governor who is the husband of another Labour councillor; selected from an all-women shortlist, she fought Blurton East ward last year and gives an address in Bucknall in the east of the city.  The Liberal Democrats, who at one point held all three seats in the main predecessor ward of Stoke and Trent Vale, have selected Les Porch whom they describe as a "campaigning postman" - he finished last in a field of eight candidates in Great Chell and Packmoor ward in 2011.  Two candidates from last year are standing again: Jackie Barnes stood for the now-defunct Community Voice group in 2011, finished third, and is now nominated by the City Independents who are the current official opposition on the council; also standing again is Michael Bednarski of UKIP, who hold county council seats in the neighbouring district of Newcastle-under-Lyme but are a relatively unknown quantity in Stoke itself.

Treating the other candidates in alphabetical order, we first come to the BNP candidate Michael Coleman who was leader of the sizeable BNP council group until the 2011 elections when they got wiped out; he is currently awaiting trial charged with racial harassment.  Independent candidate Gary Elsby is the former secretary of the Stoke Central constituency Labour Party, who walked out on them when he didn't get the Labour nomination for the last general election and Tristam Hunt did; Elsby stood as an independent against Hunt to no discernible effect.  The Conservative candidate is Network Rail employee Harold Gregory, an ex-soldier who now passes on his skills by training Army cadets.  Former BNP councillor Mark Leat is standing for the BNP splinter group Democratic Nationalists; expelled from the BNP after falling out with the then group leader, he lost re-election in 2008 as an independent and was an England First Party candidate in last year's Stoke elections.  Finally, at the bottom of the ballot paper is Matt Wright, who contested Stoke's bizarrely-named (to outsiders) Dresden and Florence ward last year; he is standing for the Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition.

Parliamentary constituency: Stoke on Trent Central
ONS Travel to Work Area: Stoke-on-Trent

Mubsira Aumir (Lab)
Jackie Barnes (City Ind)
Michael Bednarski (UKIP)
Michael Coleman (BNP)
Gary Elsby (Ind)
Harold Gregory (C)
Mark Leat (Dem Nat)
Les Porch (LD)
Matt Wright (TUSC)

May 2011 result Lab 537 LD 321 Community Voice 277 UKIP 206

Mubsira AUMIR, 188 Ruxley Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST2 9BS [Labour Party Candidate]
Jackie BARNES, 14 Greyswood Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST4 6LG [City INDEPENDENTS]
Michael Anthony BEDNARSKI, 60 Keelings Drive, Stoke-on-Trent ST4 5QX [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Michael COLEMAN, 5 Caverswall Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST3 6PE [British National Party]
Gary ELSBY, 10 Hill View, Stoke-on-Trent ST2 7AR [Independent]
Harold David GREGORY, 64 Riverside Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST4 6LU [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Mark LEAT, 35 Diarmid Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST4 4QL [Democratic Nationalists]
Les PORCH, 28 Harding Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST1 3BQ [Liberal Democrats]
Matt WRIGHT, 42 Erskine Street, Stoke-on-Trent ST3 4NJ [Trade Unionists and Socialists Against Cuts]

Prediction: Lab 30 CityInd 24 LD 14 C 10 UKIP 9 BNP 5 TUSC 4 Dem Nat 3 Elsby 1


HARLING AND HEATHLANDS, Breckland district council, Norfolk; and MID FOREST, same council; caused respectively by the resignations of Conservative councillors Kay Fisher and Bernard English.  Lady Fisher is resigning to avoid a conflict of interest; her husband has a financial link with the Crown Estate which is putting forward development plans for Thetford.  Bernard English's resignation is due to poor health.

Some spice has been added to these by-elections by last week's result in the Queen's ward of Attleborough town, in which the Conservatives were run very close by the Labour candidate who ran a campaign based on opposing car parking charges in the area.  However, these are rural wards, rather different in character from Attleborough.

The Harling and Heathlands ward covers seven parishes in the Thet Valley, directly east of the town of Thetford and hard up against the Suffolk border.  The largest villages in the ward are Garboldisham and East Harling.  Some way north of Harling is the almost-unused railway station for the ward, Harling Road on the Ely-Norwich line.

This two-member ward is a safe Conservative area and in recent years there has only been one non-Conservative candidate; a Green candidate in 2007 who polled 30%, and a Labour candidate in 2011 who got the same score.

The Mid Forest ward is even more rural, an agglomeration of eight tiny parishes to the south of Swaffham (Foulden, Oxborough, Gooderstone, Beachamwell, Cockley Cley, South Pickenham, Great Cressingham and Little Cressingham).  It has not seen a contested election since its creation in 2003, Bernard English taking over as councillor unopposed in 2011 after the previous district councillor (who is still the local county councillor) retired.

For the Harling and Heathlands by-election the Tories have selected Marion Chapman-Allen, who gained the Thetford East county council seat from Labour in 2009 but lost her district council seat in Thetford-Saxon ward last year; she gives an address in Garboldisham.  Last year's Labour candidate, Stephen Green from the delightfully-named village of Blo' Norton, is trying again.  The Liberal Democrats are contesting this ward for the first time with Steve Gordon, who fought the local county council seat (Guiltcross) in 2009 and got nowhere; also standing is Denis Crawford of UKIP, who was just nine votes behind Chapman-Allen in Thetford-Saxon ward last year.

The Mid Forest by-election is contested with Conservative and Labour candidates nominated.  The Conservative candidate Mike Nairn is the chairman of Weeting parish council, a parish some distance away from the ward; he is opposed by the Labour candidate Alexander Vyse, a 22-year-old economics graduate from Oxborough.

Harling and Heathlands
Parliamentary constituency: South West Norfolk
Norfolk county council division: Guiltcross
ONS Travel to Work Area: Thetford and Mildenhall

Marion Chapman-Allen (C)
Denis Crawford (UKIP)
Steve Gordon (LD)
Stephen Green (Lab)

May 2011 result C 928/875 Lab 403
May 2007 result C 713/678 Grn 350
May 2007 result C 754/669 Lab 257 Grn 213

Marion CHAPMAN-ALLEN, 8 Elm Grove, Garboldisham, Diss, Norfolk IP22 2RY [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Denis Melvin CRAWFORD, 18 St Michaels Close, Thetford, Norfolk IP24 3EH [U.K.Independence Party]
Steve GORDON, School House, Market Place, Kenninghall, Norwich NR16 2AH [Liberal Democrat]
Stephen GREEN, 15 Meadowside, Blo Norton, Diss, Norfolk IP22 2JF [The Labour Party Candidate]

Prediction: C 50 Lab 32 UKIP 9 LD 9 

Mid Forest
Parliamentary constituency: South West Norfolk
Norfolk county council division: The Brecks
ONS Travel to Work Area: King's Lynn and Fakenham

Mike Nairn (C)
Alexander Vyse (Lab)

May 2011 result C unopposed
May 2007 result C unopposed
May 2003 result C unopposed

Mike NAIRN, Sixpenny Tithe, Park View, Weeting, Brandon, Suffolk IP27 0QD [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Alexander VYSE, 30 Oxborough, Kings Lynn, Norfolk PE33 9PS [The Labour Party Candidate]

Prediction: C 60 Lab 40
