For once, August has brought a definite improvement in the summer weather in my area.  However, it's still not as nice as some people wish it to be so many people are off on their summer jollies.  With the Olympics now just a memory and silly season upon us, it's not a good time to hold a local by-election, but there have been two local by-elections foisted upon voters this week, both in the Eastern region of England.  We start with a Conservative defence in Bedfordshire before moving to a seaside ward in Essex that will seem strangely familiar to those who read this column regularly.


STOTFOLD AND LANGFORD, Central Bedfordshire council; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Jonathan Clarke.

This ward, hard-up against the Hertfordshire border, is one of those wards that contains two settlements which don't have a lot of links between them apart from the River Ivel, which links all the villages in the ward.

At the southern end is Stotfold, a large village just off the Great North Road.  Stotfold has seen much growth in recent years (the Hitchin/Letchworth/Baldock conurbation is just across the county boundary), particularly the Fairfield Park housing estate developed on the site of the former Fairfield mental hospital, which is scheduled to declare UDI from Stotfold and become a civil parish of its own next year.  Stotfold's most famous daughter is cyclist Victoria Pendleton, who won a gold and a silver medal at the Olympics last week to add to her previous gold medal from Beijing.

To the north of Stotfold is the village of Astwick, after which the ward strikes north-west across fields and the East Coast Main Line to the long, straggling village of Langford on the east bank of the Ivel.

Central Bedfordshire is a relatively new council, and its first election in 2009 was on temporary wards based on the old Bedfordshire County Council divisions.  Stotfold was part of a four-member ward with the neighbouring village of Arlesey, while Langford was included in a two-member ward with Henlow Village.  Both wards returned a full slate of Conservative councillors, as had the Mid Bedfordshire wards covering this area at the last district election in 2007, although at that election the Conservatives gained from the Lib Dems the two-member Langford and Henlow Village district ward (which was rather smaller than the county division of the same name) and one of the three district council seats in Stotfold.

Central Bedfordshire's wards were redrawn for the 2011 election and this ward was an easy victory for the three Conservative candidates, their main opposition coming from independent candidates John Street and Christina Turner, who had been deselected by the Conservatives following a two-year term as councillors for Stotfold and Arlesey.  (Both of them were district councillors for Stotfold before then - Street had sat on both the county and district councils.)  Labour narrowly pushed the Lib Dems into fourth place.

The Conservatives have selected Clarke's widow Gillian, who lives in Langford.  Labour's candidate Satinderjit Singh Dhaliwal, from Stotfold, is trying again after fighting the ward last year.  The other two candidates both fought Sandy ward last year: they are former Lib Dem district councillor Anthony Baines and UKIP candidate George Konstantinidis.

Parliamentary constituency: North East Bedfordshire

Anthony Baines (LD)
Gillian Clarke (C)
Satinjerdit Singh Dhaliwal (Lab)
George Konstantinidis (UKIP)

May 2011 result C 2227/2162/2063 Ind 1150/926 Lab 760/670/652 LD 756/504/404

Anthony Roger BAINES, 23 Birch Close, Broom, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire SG18 9NR [Liberal Democrat Focus Team]
Gillian Ann CLARKE, 11 Mill Meadow, Langford, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire SG18 9UR [The Conservative Party]
Satinderjit Singh DHALIWAL, 20 Mowbray Crescent, Stotfold, Hitchin, Hertfordshire SG5 4DY [The Labour Party Candidate]
George KONSTANTINIDIS, 6 Greens Close, Sandy, Bedfordshire SG19 1AD [UKIP]

Prediction: C 57 Lab 21 LD 15 UKIP 7


ST BARTHOLOMEWS, Tendring district council, Essex; caused by the resignation of Holland-on-Sea Residents Association councillor Chris Cowlin after just three months in office.  He found that he was unable to fulfil all the duties of a councillor.

The Tendring local government district is the north-eastern corner of Essex, basically everything beyond Colchester, with the seaside resort of Clacton-on-Sea and the port of Harwich being its largest towns.  St Bartholomews ward (named after a local church) covers the western part of Holland-on-Sea, an eastern suburb of Clacton.  

This ward is coastal retiree territory, with the 2001 census finding that the population of the ward had a median age of 61 (the median age of England as a whole is 37).  Not quite 'Frinton for the incontinent' as a famous Liverpool Street station graffito had it, but not far off either geographically or demographically.

Tendring local politics is rather weird, in that much of the opposition to the Conservative group (who gained overall control last year) comes from local residents' groups.  The residents fell back overall last year and Labour, who poll well in Harwich, are now the second largest group on the council, but the Holland-on-Sea Residents Association did buck this trend, greatly increasing their majority in St Bartholomews ward to turn it from a marginal into a safe ward, and also gaining from the Conservatives the other Holland-on-Sea ward (Haven ward).  There was a by-election on 22nd March this year after one of the Residents' councillors died, and the by-election result confirmed the continuing swing towards the Residents.  Whether this trend will continue in a by-election caused by the resignation of the winner of the previous by-election is doubtful.

This by-election is back to a straight fight between the Residents and Conservatives, Labour deciding not to continue after polling dismally in the March by-election.  There are two new candidates, Colin Winfield for the Residents and Graham Townley for the Conservatives. 

Essex county council division: Clacton East
Parliamentary constituency: Clacton
ONS Travel to Work Area: Clacton

Graham Townley (C)
Colin Winfield (HOSRA)

March 2012 by-election Holland-on-Sea Res Assoc 1089 C 289 Lab 120
May 2011 result Holland-on-Sea Res Assoc 1341/1278 C 527/428
May 2007 result Holland-on-Sea Res Assoc 908/853 C 783/778
May 2003 result Holland-on-Sea Res Assoc 737/673 C 640/624

Graham Roland TOWNLEY, 8 Sladburys Lane, Clacton on Sea, Essex CO15 6NU [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Colin Paul WINFIELD, 63 Chelmsford Road, Holland on Sea, Clacton on Sea, Essex CO15 5DJ [The Holland on Sea Residents' Association]

Prediction: HOSRA 77 C 23


There are no by-elections next week so my next preview will be in two weeks' time.