<blockquote>
"All the right votes, but not necessarily in the right order"
</blockquote>

This column does indeed cover all the important votes, and away from the drama of Westminster the local by-election cycle is still just about turning.  We already know the winner of one of this week's polls, the election for Alderman of Broad Street ward in the City of London: nobody challenged the incumbent Alderman Michael Mainelli, and he will be formally declared re-elected at the Wardmote tonight.  This column sends its congratulations.  That's not the only piece of electoral news taking place today, as we go to Nottinghamshire for an unusual Wednesday by-election...

<hr/>

<h2>Sutton Junction and Harlow Wood</h2>

Ashfield council, Nottinghamshire; caused by the resignation of Steven Carroll, who had been elected for Labour but had defected to the Ashfield Independents group.  He was first elected in 2011, sitting for the predecessor ward of Sutton in Ashfield East until 2015; and had also been a long-serving Nottinghamshire county councillor until losing his seat in 2017.

We have come to Sutton-in-Ashfield, a town of around 45,000 souls some miles to the north of Nottingham.  Although there is (or was) coal down below, Sutton-in-Ashfield was traditionally more of a textile town specialising in hosiery.  The town's main park, Sutton Lawns, was once the grounds of a stately home built by a hosiery merchant, whose mill still stands on the edge of the park; and the tights and stockings brand Pretty Polly started life in Sutton-in-Ashfield in 1919.  (In case you're wondering, the name comes from the racehorse of that name which won the Fillies' Triple Crown in 1904; a local bookmaker made a lot of money from that, and his daughter lifted the name for the company.)  Pretty Polly was still manufacturing here until 2005, but then crossed the border into Derbyshire where its products are now made in Belper.

Further to the east is the village of Harlow Wood, set in one of the few remaining parts of Sherwood Forest.  Harlow Wood specialises in help for the infirm and disabled: there was once an orthopaedic hospital here, while still going is Portland College which provides vocational training for the disabled.  Its original intake in 1949 was made up of Second World War veterans and former miners.

Sherwood Forest was of course the home of that noted criminal Robin Hood, whose speciality was in stealing from the rich and giving to the poor.  This is similar to the sort of thing the Labour Party would like to get the chance to do, but it's not always plain sailing for the party in Ashfield.  The district's politics has never been quite the same since the political rise of Jason Zadrozny, who became leader of the council in 2007 at the age of just 27 as leader of the Liberal Democrat group: four years later he was less than 200 votes away from becoming the first Lib Dem MP for Ashfield.  Despite Labour regaining an overall majority on the council in 2011, the Ashfield Lib Dems didn't give up and were very confident of getting Zadrozy over the line and into Parliament in the 2015 general election - until just before the close of nominations when he was arrested on child sax allegations.

The case didn't come to trial until the November 2017, at which point the prosecution offered no evidence and Zadrozny was acquitted of all charges.  In the meantime he had been re-elected to Ashfield council and Nottinghamshire county council as an independent, having been dropped by the Lib Dems, as well as contesting the 2016 election for Nottinghamshire Police and Crime Commissioner.

With his political career free to resume, Zadrozny has wasted no time in getting back to the levers of power, helped by an almighty split in the Ashfield Labour party which in the 2015 election had won 22 out of 35 seats, with 5 Lib Dems, 4 Conservatives and 4 Independents forming the opposition.  There was a sign of things to come in the last Ashfield by-election, held in Hucknall in October 2017 to replace Tory councillor Ben Bradley who had been elected as Tory MP for Mansfield.  Let that sink in for the moment: a Tory MP for Mansfield.  The Conservatives resoundingly lost that council by-election to the Zadroznyite independents.  Six months later, Jason Zadrozny was back as council leader after several Labour councillors defected: his Ashfield Independents group runs a minority administration with 10 councillors, against 14 Labour, 5 Conservatives, 5 other independents, zero Liberal Democrats and this vacancy.

Which is suitably complicated, for Steven Carroll was one of the Labour councillors who had defected to the Zadrozynite banner.  This ward was created only in 2015 when the Boundary Commission split up the former Sutton in Ashfield East ward into several smaller areas: and Carroll was elected very narrowly in that year.  His winning score was 661 votes with the Liberal Democrats just six votes behind on 655; both parties had 38% of the vote, with the Conservatives taking the remaining 25%.  With the turnaround in the district's political scene since then, a better guide may be the Nottinghamshire county council elections in May last year: all three Sutton-in-Ashfield divisions returned Zadroznyite candidates with over 60% of the vote, Labour's Steve Carroll losing his seat in Sutton Central and East (which includes this ward) by the score of 60-32.  And no doubt watching closely will be the shadow justice secretary and Labour MP for Ashfield Gloria de Piero, who was re-elected in June last year with a 9% swing against her and a majority of just 441 votes over the Conservatives.

So this by-election looks more consequential than most, as it will give an important indication of where the electoral momentum (as opposed the political momentum, or even the political Momentum) is in this corner of Nottinghamshire.  The Ashfield Independents will be hoping to defend their defection gain, and have selected Matthew Relf who works in IT.  Labour will want their seat back, and their candidate is Kevin Hall.  The Lib Dems will be hoping to win here with Martin Howes, a business analyst.  You can't really blame the Conservatives for running a Self-centred campaign, because Christine Self is their candidate.  Also standing are two candidates who in this time of Brexit will be hoping to appeal to the town's Leave majority: Stephen Crosby for the Democrats and Veterans Party and Moira Sansom for UKIP.

Parliamentary constituency: Ashfield
Nottinghamshire county council division: Sutton Central and East

Stephen Crosby (Democrats and Veterans)
Kevin Hall (Lab)
Martin Howes (LD)
Matthew Relf (Ashfield Ind)
Moira Sansom (UKIP)
Christine Self (C)

May 2015 result Lab 661 LD 655 C 430

Kevin Allan BALL, 31 Morley Street, Stanton Hill, Sutton-in-Ashfield NG17 3HA [Labour Party]
Stephen John CROSBY, 30 Linby Road, Hucknall, Nottingham NG15 7TS [Democrats and Veterans Party]
Martin Alan HOWES, 16 Roman Crescent, Hucknall, Nottingham NG15 8GL [Liberal Democrats]
Matthew James RELF, 16 Searby Road, Sutton-in-Ashfield NG17 5JR [Ashfield Independents Working All Year Round]
Moira Jean SANSOM, 3 Carburton Way, Harris Road, Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Nottingham NG17 7PS [UK Independence Party]
Christine Jennifer SELF, 28 Pennine Close, Huthwaite, Sutton-in-Ashfield NG17 2QD [The Conservative Party Candidate]

<hr/>

There are four local by-elections on Thursday 13th December 2018, with Labour defending three seats in England and the Conservatives one in Scotland.  Read on...

<hr/>

<h2>West Green</h2>

Haringey council, North London; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Ishmael Osamor.  

As anybody who performs on a stage will know, timing is everything.  We're in a fast-changing political landscape here, and that's creating all sorts of problems for Andrew's Previews.  I wrote this piece last weekend, and delivered it to Britain Elects on Tuesday morning, so I have no idea in what political context the results of these by-elections are going to be seen through.  By the time you read this we might have an agreement on how to withdraw from the EU (and not before time); we might have had a government no-confidenced for the first time since 1979; we might have a new Prime Minister; we might be in all sorts of political, constitutional and economic chaos with nobody knowing what the heck is going on.  Or we might be carrying on pretty much as before with desperately trying to finish the Christmas shopping being the number one priority.  What transpires between the time of writing and the time you read this is going to depend on a large number of political actors looking plausible, staying sober and saying the lines they are given in the right order; who goes off-script or fluffs their entries could end up having unexpected consequences.

Your columnist tried to study mathematics, and from a mathematical point of view there are two things which stand out in the current political atmosphere.  There's a whole field of mathematics called chaos theory, which takes some equations which may look very simple and deterministic but whose outcomes depend so finely on the initial conditions that it's impossible to predict how they are going to behave in practice.  The butterfly effect, you might call it.  You don't have to go far in real life to find chaotic systems: look at the weather, the stock market, the UK Independence Party.  Any budding mathematician will also be familiar with the concept of <em>reductio ad absurdum</em> or, to give it its modern name, proof by contradiction, which lies at the heart of many mathematical proofs: the existence of an infinity of prime numbers, the irrationality of the square root of 2 and the impossibility of Fermat's Last Theorem all depend on this technique.  The idea is to assume a position (say, that it's possible to have one's cake and eat it) and keep arguing until you end up with something which is either manifestly not true or is exactly opposite to something you've already established or assumed earlier in the argument (this would require the same cake to be in two places simultaneously), at which point your position collapses into a contradiction and disappears in a puff of logic.  Politics, unfortunately, has sidestepped this mathematical technique by developing the concept of "cakeism"; that successor to doublethink has only served to kick further down the road the point at which the contradictions are revealed, the red lines disappear in a puff of logic and it transpires that someone left the cake out in the rain.  Maybe the time you read this we'll finally have reached that point.  Who knows?

Cakeism really should have been the Word of 2018, but the Oxford Dictionaries' lexicographers disagreed.  Instead they voted for another politically-inspired word to describe our times: "toxic".  Which brings us neatly to this week's first by-election.  There are all sorts of toxic things out there, not all of which are political.  Indeed some toxic things are quite enjoyable: it's not for nothing that the dictionary lists "intoxicating" as a synonym of "exhilarating" or "exciting".  Some toxic things are quite illegal.  Some are both enjoyable and illegal.

A lesson learned the hard way this year by a man in his twenties called Ishmael Osamor.  In 2017 Mr Osamor had travelled to the Lulworth Estate in Dorset to attend the music festival Bestival.  On the second day of Bestival 2017 he was caught by police in possession of £2,500 worth of cannabis, cocaine, ecstasy and ketamine, which led to charges being brought by police.  At Bournemouth crown court in October 2018 Osamor pleaded guilty to four drugs offences - three counts of possession with intent to supply and one of possession - and was sentenced to a two-year community order.  His mum stood by him, which is fair enough: that's what mums do.  And in the normal course of events that would probably have been that.

This, of course, is not the normal course of events.  Ishmael Osamor's mum is also his employer: she is Kate Osamor, Member of Parliament for Edmonton and (until she resigned the week before last following some ill-advised words to a journalist looking into the whole affair) shadow international development secretary, and she employs Ishmael in her parliamentary office.  And between charges being brought and the trial taking place, Osamor had entered the weird and wacky world of Haringey Labour politics by being elected to Haringey council and had already made his mark by joining the council's cabinet.  A two-year community order is nowhere near the sentence level which would have disqualified him from the council; but when the conviction became public knowledge questions were inevitably raised over how this person was selected given that there was a court case hanging over him.  Ishmael Osamor chose to jump before he was pushed, and immediately resigned from Haringey council after less than six months in office.

It's rather a long way from the Lulworth Estate to the Broadwater Farm Estate, both geographically and socially.  The Farm is the major part of Haringey's West Green ward: in a borough starkly divided between rich and poor, this is in the poor half.  Although most of the area was built-up by 1920 as the railways connected Tottenham to central London, Broadwater Farm remained rural thanks to its low-lying ground which was prone to flooding from the River Moselle; when Tottenham urban district council bought the farm in 1932 it turned half of it into a park (the Lordship Recreation Ground) and the other half into allotments.

Development came to the Moselle valley (that reminds me, I must get some wine in for Christmas) in 1967 with Haringey council commencing construction of the Broadwater Farm Estate, a series of concrete carbuncles in the style of le Corbusier.  Le Corbusier may have seen the house as a machine for living in, but the Broadwater Farm housing didn't prove a very effective machine in its initial form: within a decade of opening the Department of the Environment had called for demolition as the only way of improving it.  The Farm became a byword for unsuccessful social housing, and its problems came to a head in 1985 with race riots and the still-unsolved murder of PC Keith Blakelock.  Things have turned around dramatically since, and in 2005 the Metropolitan Police disbanded its Broadwater Farm unit because there was such a low crime rate.  Despite some redevelopment, the problems with substandard housing haven't gone away, and the Grenfell Tower fire brought things to a head: two of the Farm's tower blocks were condemned and evacuated earlier this year and nine others were found to be structurally unsafe.

This ward isn't all Broadwater Farm, of course; to the west of the Lordship Recreation Ground are a series of Victorian terraces along Downhills Way and Westbury Avenue, while the West Green area itself is at the ward's southern end.  Connections to Central London are provided by the Underground station at Turnpike Lane, which is at the western corner of the ward.

The census makes the point that this is one of the most multicultural areas of London.  In 2011 West Green was in the top 25 wards in England and Wales for the "White Other" ethnic group at 31% of the population; that compared to 24% black (just outside the top 100), 22% White British and 5.6% "other" ethnic groups.  It was in the top 50 wards for those new born in the new EU states, with Poles and Bulgarians particularly strongly represented; the census also picked up large proportions born in Turkey and Ghana.

This adds up to a safe Labour ward.  Haringey Labour has had its problems over the years, most recently a well-publicised takeover by the party's left wing in advance of the 2018 elections - rather appropriate really in a borough where Jeremy Corbyn used to be a councillor.  The left-wing takeover clearly went down badly in the rich muesli belt of Hornsey and Wood Green (the Liberal Democrats gained six council seats there in May) but probably didn't have as much of an adverse effect in West Green.  In May Labour won here with 64% of the vote, with the Greens best of the rest on 13%; the Lib Dems, Conservatives and George Galloway's Respect party have all filled the runner-up spot here at some point this century.  In the 2016 London Mayoral election Sadiq Khan beat Zac Goldsmith here 69-13, while the Labour slate led the Greens 63-12 in the London Members ballot.

Defending for Labour is Seema Chandwani, a Unite figure and chairwoman of the Haringey branch of the TUC.  The Green Party candidate is Cecily Spelling who works for an environmental charity.  Also standing are Mirza Baig for the Conservatives and Elizabeth Payne for the Lib Dems.

Parliamentary constituency: Tottenham
London Assembly constituency: Enfield and Haringey

May 2018 result Lab 2077/2072/1899 Grn 437/272/270 C 292/266/231 LD 277/254/214 Ind 167
May 2014 result Lab 1780/1772/1697 Grn 455/361/325 C 383/326/290 LD 238/215/177 TUSC 237/187/154
May 2010 result Lab 2471/2264/2262 LD 926/866/826 C 803/780/761 Grn 595/333/325
May 2006 result Lab 1992/1135/1073 Respect 626/535 Grn 649 LD 426/329/328 C 378/336/324
May 2002 result Lab 1100/1079/1033 C 340/306/257 LD 313/227/223 Grn 269 Socialist Alliance 142/116

Mirza BAIG, Flat 15, Mussington House, Stainby Road, London N15 4FJ [Conservatives]
Seema CHANDWANI, 11 Culross Close, London N15 3RH [The Labour Party Candidate]
Elizabeth Sarah PAYNE, 34 Effingham Road, London N8 0AB [Liberal Democrats]
Cecily SPELLING, 4c Vicarage Parade, West Green Road, London N15 3BL [Green Party]

<hr/>

<h2>Toddbrook</h2>

Harlow council, Essex; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Karen Clempner.

Dan LONG, 57 Longfield, Harlow CM18 6LA [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Frances Lenise MASON, 46 London Road, Harlow CM17 9LS [Labour Party]
Christopher MILLINGTON, 201 Pennymead, Harlow CM20 3JE [Liberal Democrats]
Tom REYNOLDS, 62 Doulton Close, Harlow CM17 9RH [The Conservative Party Candidate]

<hr/>

<h2>Brambles and Thorntree</h2>

Middlesbrough council, North Yorkshire; caused by the death of Labour councillor Peter Purvis.

Paul Michael HAMILTON, 19 Langthorpe, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough TS7 0PR [Liberal Democrat]
David SMITH, 15 Rainsford Crescent, Middlesbrough TS3 9HJ [Conservative Party Candidate]
Janet THOMPSON, 63 Premier Road, Middlesbrough TS3 8NU [Labour Party]
Graham WILSON, 90 Carisbrooke Avenue, Middlesbrough TS3 9LL [Independent]

<hr/>

<h2>Dee and Glenkens</h2>

Dumfries and Galloway council, Scotland; caused by the resignation of Conservative councillor Patsy Gilroy.

Jennifer BLUE, Meikle Mochrum Stables, Castle Douglas DG7 3PD [UKIP]
Pauline Louise DRYSDALE, Summerhill, Clarebrand, Castle Douglas DG7 3AQ [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Laura Elizabeth MOODIE, Plunton House, Borgue, Kirkcudbright DG6 4SP [Scottish Green Party]
Glen MURRAY, 12 Union Street, Kirkcudbright DG6 4JF [Scottish National Party (SNP)]
Colin Matthew WYPER, 7 Deacon Road, Kirkcudbright DG6 4LJ [Independent]

