<blockquote>
"All the right votes, but not necessarily in the right order"
</blockquote>

Three polls of note on 14th June 2018, and we'll start with the big one:

<hr/>

<h2>Lewisham East</h2>

House of Commons; caused by the resignation of Labour MP Heidi Alexander, who had served since 2010.

Fifty-three weeks on from the snap general election and we come to the second parliamentary by-election of the 2017 Parliament, and the first in Great Britain.  It's also the first time in six months that Andrew's Previews has had cause to visit London, as every councillor in the 32 London Boroughs was up for re-election last May so there have not been any by-elections in the capital so far this year.  With your columnist being based in that unusually sunny part of the world (for the moment, touch wood), Greater Manchester, London was not high up my list of things to write about regarding the 2018 local elections, and I managed to deliver multiple pieces to Britain Elects on those polls without mentioning the capital once.  Would that some commentators could have done likewise.  Nevertheless it is legitimately London's turn for the limelight this week.

The name Lewisham is an Anglo-Saxon one, referring to the "house among the meadows"; a rather incongruous image when you look at the place today.  This was still a rural area until the railway came in the 1840s, encouraging the rapid development of commuter housing in a district just six miles from Charing Cross.  At the time the area now covered by this constituency was part of Kent, before being incorporated into the County of London on its creation in 1889.

At this time much of what became the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham was still farmland, but the gaps were progressively filled in.  The East constituency's housing stock still predominantly dates from the nineteenth century; and by the 1930s, with the completion of the London County Council's Downham estate, there was no more room left.  The Downham estate still occupies much of the southern end of this constituency: developed in the late 1920s, it was considered a showpiece estate and described by Lewisham council as a "garden city".  Much of the estate's population was working-class people, rehoused from substandard housing in places such as Rotherhithe and the East End, to the disgust of locals over the county boundary in Bromley who went so far as to build a wall to keep the riff-raff out.  History doesn't record whether Lewisham paid for the wall.

Further in is the constituency's main commercial centre, Catford.  Despite there being a large fibreglass sculpture of a cat here, the name actually refers to a cattle ford on the River Ravensbourne.  Lewisham council is based in Catford, and is overseeing extensive redevelopment of the town centre.

To the east lie the railway suburbs of Grove Park and Hither Green, together with Lee which was one of the two parishes which merged to create Lewisham borough in 1889.  Karl Marx lived in Lee for a time, and at the northern end of the seat is another area which, although for many years it has been the most affluent part of this constituency, has a radical political history.  The Peasant's Revolt of 1381, Jack Cade's rebellion of 1450 and the Cornish rebellion of 1497 all mustered at Blackheath.  It's easy to see why.  To this day Blackheath is an area of high ground and open space with excellent communications: the Roman Watling Street and the modern A2 pass over the heath on the way to Canterbury and the Channel Ports, leading to the area being a haunt of highwaymen in the eighteenth century.  If the Nazi Operation Sealion had ever come to fruition, Blackheath would have been the last line of defence before London.

The open space of Blackheath and easy distance from London led to strong associations with sport.  By tradition this was the first place that golf was played in England; Kent played several first-class cricket matches on the heath in the eighteenth century; three Blackheath clubs were among the founder members of the FA in 1863; and the first rugby match between England and Wales was played here in 1881.  Each April Blackheath comes to prominence as the starting point for the London Marathon.

However, the main industry on the heath in days gone by (if you discount the predations of highwaymen) was gravel extraction, which made a pretty penny for the landowner: the Lord of the Manor of Lewisham, the Earls of Dartmouth.  And this is an appropriate point to start to consider those former MPs whom the winner of this by-election will tread in the footsteps of, for the first MP for a seat to bear the name "Lewisham" was William Legge, the 6th Earl of Dartmouth.  A Conservative, Legge was first elected to Parliament in 1878 in an uncontested by-election for the predecessor seat of West Kent, and at this point in time was generally known by the courtesy title of Viscount Lewisham.  He had the traditional upper-class education: Eton, Christ Church Oxford, officer in the South Staffordshire Regiment.  The year before being elected to Parliament he had played first-class cricket for the MCC.

Viscount Lewisham took over the constituency that bore his name when it was created in the redistribution of 1885.  He defeated the Liberal candidate Benjamin Whitworth, an outgoing MP who sought election here after his seat - Drogheda, in what's now the Republic of Ireland - was abolished.  Lewisham beat Whitworth in Lewisham by the margin of 58-42, and increased his majority to 69.5-30.5 the following year.  The 1886 general election returned the Conservatives to power under Lord Salisbury, and Viscount Lewisham entered the government as Vice-Chairman of the Household.  Under the rules in force then Lewisham had to get his government appointment confirmed by seeking re-election to the House, and nobody bothered to oppose him in the resulting by-election.

Viscount Lewisham succeeded to his father's titles and entered the Lords in 1891.  The resulting Lewisham by-election was held easily for the Conservatives by John Penn.  Described as "one of the best-known Parliamentary golfers" with his own private course near North Berwick, Penn came from a business rather than an aristocratic background: he ran the family marine engineering firm of John Penn and Sons, although he wasn't an engineer himself.  So far, so Donald Trump.  Penn easily won the 1891 by-election and the 1892 general election, and after that nobody bothered to oppose him for the 1895 and 1900 elections.

John Penn's death in 1903 resulted in the third Lewisham by-election in as many decades.  The 1903 by-election was contested, with the Liberals putting up a young Scottish barrister called James Cleland, who was a London county councillor for the borough and chairman of the Parks and Establishment committees.  Cleland, who would later serve as MP for Glasgow Bridgeton from 1906 to December 1910, and died in 1914 at the early age of 40, had the best Liberal result yet in Lewisham - 42.5% - but it wasn't good enough to displace the Tories.  Their winning candidate was Edward Coates, a stockbroker, Major in the Duke of Wellington's Regiment and noted art collector.  Coates had a long career in the seat, easily weathering the Liberal landslide of 1906; he would go on to serve as chairman of Surrey county council and be appointed baronet.

The growing population of Lewisham meant that it was divided into two seats at the 1918 redistribution.  Sir Edward Coates sought re-election in Lewisham West, leaving the way clear in East for the new Conservative candidate Lt-Col Assheton Pownall.  Pownall, who was elected unopposed in 1918 with the Coalition's coupon, had come from an engineering family; he was a London county councillor for Lewisham from 1907 to 1910 and had fought Rotherhithe in the two 1910 elections.  He had served in the London Regiment during the Great War, and shortly after his election to Parliament was appointed as a military OBE.  With a safe seat Pownall could throw himself into the work of Parliament; he gained a reputation for hard work on committees, and was knighted for his political service in 1926.

But by this time demographic changes were hard at work.  The completion of the Downham estate fundamentally changed the character of Lewisham East, making Labour competitive.  Pownall had a close shave in the 1929 election which brought Labour to power for the first time, holding his seat by just 402 votes over Labour candidate John Wilmot.  Wilmot stood for this seat three times before getting into Parliament by winning the 1933 Fulham East by-election; he was a minister under Attlee before ending his days in the Lords.  Labour put up another future MP against Pownall, Freda Corbet (Camberwell North West 1945-50, Peckham 1950-Feb 1974) standing here in 1935.

Sir Assheton Pownall was finally swept away in the Attlee landslide of 1945, as Labour defeated the Conservatives nationally.  The first non-Conservative MP for a Lewisham constituency was one of the major figures of the Labour Party: none other than the outgoing Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison.  Morrison, who had transferred here after fifteen years (with broken service) as MP for Hackney South, can justifiably claim to be one of the people who had the most impact on what London has become today.  In 1931, as transport minister in the Macdonald Labour government, Morrison introduced the bill which set up the nationalised London Transport; and in 1934 he took over the most important local government job in the UK, Leader of the London County Council.  As LCC leader Morrison had effectively forced central government to pay for a replacement Waterloo Bridge, and introduced the Green Belt to put a stop to the relentless expansion of the city.  We are still working through the long-term effects of those decisions, as we are with one of the more dubious parts of Morrison's political legacy: he was the grandfather of Peter Mandelson.

Morrison had run the 1945 Labour election campaign, and in the Attlee government became Deputy Prime Minster and Leader of the Commons; other than the Green Belt, his main legacy of that period was probably the Festival of Britain and the resulting redevelopment of the South Bank of the Thames.

The 1950 redistribution awarded a third seat to the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham, and this was effected by dividing Lewisham East into two new seats, called Lewisham South and Lewisham North.  Morrison moved to the South division, based on Catford, Hither Green and the Downham estate, which promised to be safe Labour and indeed was.  In 1950 he defeated a future Tory MP, Frederick Gough (Horsham, 1951-64) who had won the Military Cross for action during the landing at Taranto in 1943.  Morrison retired from the Commons in 1959 and passed his seat on to Carol Johnson, who had a majority of just 3,081 in his first election - the defeated Tory candidate was John Hunt, who went on to serve for 33 years as MP for Bromley and then Ravensbourne.  In 1964 Mr Johnson had a rather more comfortable win against another future Tory MP, Barney Heyhoe (Heston and ISleworth 1970-February 1974, Brentford and Isleworth Feb 1974-1992).

Lewisham South may have been a safe Labour seat, but Lewsham North was a completely different proposition.  Based on Lee, Blackheath and Lewisham itself, it was won for the Conservatives in 1950 by Sir Austin Hudson, 1st Baronet, who returned to the Commons after losing Hackney North in the Labour landslide.  Sir Austen did not have a safe seat: his majorities over Labour rose from 2,491 in the 1950 election to 3,236 in the 1955 election.  He died in November 1956.

Sir Austin's widow Peggy, the dowager Lady Hudson, later employed a butler called Roy Fontaine to work on the Hudson family's estate in Dumfriesshire.  Fontaine was not who Lady Hudson had thought he was: his real name was Archibald Hall and he was a career criminal who had taken the job in order to steal Lady Hudson's valuables.  He never did carry that crime out, deciding that he liked the job and the employer too much, and that was a good thing from Lady Hudson's point of view.  Archibald Hall became one of the UK's most notorious serial killers, committing his first murder while in Lady Hudson's service; his five victims included the former Labour MP for Accrington Walter Scott-Elliot and Walter's wife Dorothy.

Fortunately Sir Austin Hudson's death was not suspicious; unfortunately for the Conservatives it forced a by-election in a marginal seat.  The 1957 Lewisham North by-election was duly lost to Labour's Niall MacDermot, who came from a legal family - his grandfather Hugh MacDermot had been Solicitor-General and Attorney-General for Ireland, and his uncle Frank MacDermot had served in the Irish Dáil and Seanad in the 1930s and 1940s.  MacDermot won the by-election with a majority of 1,110 on a swing of over 5%.  He failed to hold to the by-election gain, but returned to the Commons in 1962 by winning the Derby North by-election, was a junior Treasury minister under Harold Wilson, and later served for twenty years as secretary-general of the International Commission of Jurists.

As stated, Niall MacDermot lost his seat in the Macmillan landslide of 1959.  The new Tory MP for Lewisham North was not yet 30 but was already a household name.  Chris Chataway had made hs name on the athletics track as a long-distance runner: he had paced Roger Bannister to the first four-minute mile in 1954, and later that year won a silver medal in the 5,000 metres at the European Athletics Championships, before breaking the world record for that distance at a London v Moscow athletics competition at White City.  That race was televised across Europe and turned Chataway into a celebrity: it almost certainly won him the title of BBC Sports Personality of 1954, the first year in which the award was made.  After completing his PPE degree at Oxford, Chataway briefly went into journalism - along with a young Robin Day he was one of ITV's first two newsreaders - and then found his niche in politics, being elected to the London County Council in 1958 as one of the three councillors for Lewisham North.  The following year he was in Parliament, defeating MacDermot with a majority of 4,613.

In office Chataway campaigned for refugees and became a junior education minister; but in 1964 his majority fell to just 343 votes and he lost his seat in the Wilson landslide of 1966.  That didn't stop his political career though; the following year Chataway became leader of the Inner London Education Authority before returning to Parliament by winning the Chichester by-election in 1969.  He retired from politics in October 1974, going into banking and charity work, and serving as chairman of the Civil Aviation Authority.  It says something for our honours system that it was that, rather than anything else in Chataway's varied career, which secured his knighthood.

The new Labour MP who defeated Chataway in 1966 was Roland Moyle, the son of Labour MP Arthur Moyle (Stourbridge 1945-50, Oldbury and Halesowen 1950-64).  Roland was a Greenwich councillor, barrister and industrial relations consultant.  He did well to hold onto Lewisham North in the 1970 election, with the Conseratives cutting his majority from 2,363 to 1,027.

By now London's local government had been reformed, with the Deptford and Lewisham Metropoltan Boroughs merging in 1964 to form the London Borough of Lewisham.  The redistribution implemented at the February 1974 election cut the expanded Lewisham borough from four constituencies to three, and that meant a recreation of the Lewisham East constituency and the abolition of Lewisham North and Lewisham South.  Although the details have changed, the Lewisham East constituency has been roughly the same ever since.

Roland Moyle won the Labour selection for the new seat in the February 1974 election, seeing off then Ealing councillor, future Tory MP (Hendon South 1987-97) and MEP (London North 1989-99) and recently re-elected Barnet councillor John Marshall by the much healthier majority of 6,306.  Moyle now joined the ranks of government, serving as a junior Northern Ireland minister in the final Wilson administration and as a health minister under Callaghan.  In the 1979 election Moyle narrowly defeated another future Tory MP, Humfrey Malins (Croydon North West 1983-92, Woking 1997-2010) by 1,593 votes.

That small Labour majority spelt trouble with the rise of the Liberal/SDP alliance and consequent split on the left side of British politics.  In the 1983 election in Lewisham East Moyle stood for a sixth term of office as the Labour candidate; the SDP candidate was Polly Toynbee (yes, <em>that</em> Polly Toynbee); and the Tories decided to emulate Chataway by selecting another candidate in their late 20s who had proven themselves at the highest levels of sport.  Colin Moynihan had been elected President of the Oxford Union in 1976, ahead of a promising young woman called Benazir Bhutto, and won a Blue for boxing against Cambridge as a bantamweight, but he made his name on the water.  Moynihan coxed the Oxford crew to victory in the 1977 Boat Race, and won a silver medal in the 1980 Moscow Olympics as cox to the British men's eight.  After that he became a political advisor to the Foreign Secretary, Francis Pym, and won the Conservative nomination for the 1983 election in Lewisham East.  With Moyle polling 36% and Toynbee 22% the left-wing vote was split, and Moynihan's 40% of the vote gave him the win by 1,909 votes.  He increased his majority in 1987 and appropriately became minister for sport, later transferring to the Department of the Environment as junior minister responsible for renewable energy.

In 1991 Moynihan's half-brother Antony, the 3rd Lord Moynihan, died of a heart attack in the Philippines.  Antony's complex life and family situation - at the time he was thought to have had five wives and six children - meant it was not clear who should inherit his peerage but Colin might have a claim on it.  The situation hadn't been resolved by the time of the 1992 election, in which Moynihan lost his seat to Labour by 1,095 votes as the left-wing vote split resolved itself.  The House of Lords eventually decided that Antony Moynihan's two sons should not inherit: his son by his fourth wife was ruled out by a paternity test, while his son by his fifth wife was found to be illegitimate because Antony had never properly divorced his fourth wife.  That left Colin Moynihan as the heir, and in 1997 he resumed his political career in the House of Lords as the 4th Lord Moynihan.  In 1999 Moynihan became an elected hereditary peer, and from 2005 to 2012 he was chairman of the British Olympic Association.  Lord Moynihan is only 62, so we may not have heard the last of him yet.

The Labour candidate who defeated Moynihan was Bridget Prentice, a teacher who entered the Commons at the same time as her then husband, Gordon Prentice (Pendle 1992-2010).  Mrs Prentice became a Labour whip in 1995 and had a long career on and off at junior ministerial level.  She made the Lewisham East seat safe in 1997, and Labour have not been seriously threatened here since.  Prentice saw off two future Tory MPs: Philip Hollobone (Kettering 2005-) in 1997 and James Cleverley (Braintree 2015-) in 2005.

Prentice was reprimanded by the Parliamentary standards commissioner in 2008 for misusing her communication allowance, and didn't seek re-election in 2010.  That left the way clear for Lewisham councillor and deputy mayor Heidi Alexander to win the Labour nomination and the seat.  Alexander was appointed shadow health secretary by Jeremy Corbyn and ran Sadiq Khan's campaign in the 2016 London mayoral election.  She resigned from the shadow cabinet in the wake of the EU referendum result, and is leaving the Commons to work for Khan as a deputy mayor of London, with responsibility for transport.  An appropriate job for a constituency where the train is the most popular way of getting to work - with the exception of the Downham estate, which is poorly served by rail and has very high bus usage.  Given that some of this constituency, particularly the Catford area, is affected by the issues with the new Thameslink timetable (issues which, let me point out, are a drop in the ocean compared to the appalling shambles which is Northern Rail), Alexander has got her work cut out in her new job.

Alexander's successor will inherit a London constituency with a typically multicultural electorate.  The 2011 census picked up significant numbers of residents born in Jamaica, Nigeria, Poland and Sri Lanka; and four of the seven wards in Lewisham East - Rushey Green, Catford South, Whitefoot and Downham - are in the top 100 in England and Wales for both black and mixed-race population.  Rushey Green ward, covering Catford town centre, is number 7 on the mixed-race list at 9% and number 14 on the black list at 38% - for comparison, the ward's White British population is under 30%.  Catford South ward makes the top 30 on both lists, and Whitefoot ward is also majority BAME.  Both Whitefoot and Downham still have high levels of social housing reflecting their history.  By contrast, Blackheath ward is the most affluent part of the seat and clearly attracts urban professionals: a majority of its workforce hold degrees, a majority of its workforce are in managerial or professional occupations, and it is in the top 100 wards in England and Wales for the 30-44 age bracket.

You don't see much of this reflected in Lewisham East's local election results: at least, not these days.  Ten years ago the political picture was very different, with the Lib Dems being competitive in Blackheath, Lee Green and the Downham estate wards and the Tories holding council seats in Grove Park.  The Coalition put paid to that, and since 2014 Labour have held every council seat in this constituency.  In last month's Lewisham council elections Labour topped the poll with 51% across the constituency; the Tories were in second with 17% and the Greens third with 15%.  Those Lib Dems who are talking up their chances of a good result might want to reflect that they were fourth across the constituency only last month with over half of their vote coming out of Blackheath and Lee Green wards; these do not look like the ingredients for a successful assault, particularly if opposition to Brexit is the only message you have.  Going back slightly further to 2016, Alexander's new employer Sadiq Khan carried this constituency in the London Mayoral election with 54% to 23% for the Conservatives; in the London Members ballot Labour led with 50%, to 17% for the Conservatives and 10% for the Green Party.  These figures don't include postal votes which were not broken down to ward level, but the picture with postal votes included is unlikely to be significantly different.

Those figures suggest that Labour should not have much to worry about in holding this by-election.  The 2017 general election result gives further cause for optimism: Alexander got a 6% swing in her favour to defeat the Conservative candidate by 68% to 23%, with no other candidates saving their deposit.

So with little realistic possibility of a seat loss here, the Westminster and media circle appears to have indulged in their favourite, if interminable, game of seeing this by-election through the prism of the two great Westminster imponderables of our time: the future of Brexit and the future of Jeremy Corbyn.  The Labour selection has therefore been closely watched through that filter.  It produced Janet Daby, who since 2010 has been a Lewisham councillor for Whitefoot ward (on the Downham estate).  She is the deputy to Lewisham's elected mayor, Damian Egan; has previously worked in social care; and is the director of a project tackling food poverty on the Downham estate.

The Conservative candidate is Ross Archer, who comes hotfoot from the 2018 Lewisham mayoral election in which he was a rather distant runner-up; he came closer to being elected in the 2018 Lewisham council election where he was runner-up in the Tories' best ward in Lewisham borough, Grove Park.  Archer is described as a local scout leader who works for a not-for-profit company, and his flagship policy appears to be to get Grove Park railway station transferred from Zone 4 to Zone 3 in Transport for London's zonal pricing system.  For those not familiar with London transport, this will make trips between the city centre and Grove Park cheaper.

Standing for the Lib Dems is Lucy Salek, who chairs a refugee charity and fought Southend West in the 2017 general election.  The Green candidate is Rosamund Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, a schoolteacher who is campaigning on air pollution issues.  UKIP have selected David Kurten, who has been a member of the London Assembly since 2016.  Maureen Martin is the candidate of the evangelical Christian Peoples Alliance, which finished last here in 2015 and 2017; in May she stood for election to Lewisham council in Lee Green ward, coming last out of eleven candidates.

This being a London parliamentary by-election, there are an awful lot of other also-rans.  First alphabetically is Charles Carey, an independent standing on a single issue of free, comprehensive and up-to-date access to legislation.  Massimo DiMambro is standing for the UKIP splinter Democrats and Veterans Party; he was UKIP candidate for Lewisham Deptford in the 2015 general election, and contested Downham ward in the 2018 Lewisham local elections, coming last out of fifteen candidates.  Sean Finch is standing for the Libertarian Party, Patrick Gray for the Radcial Party, Thomas Hall for the Young People's Party and Howling Laud Hope for the Official Monster Raving Loong Party.  Possibly more serious about their candidature is Mandu Reid of the Women's Equality Party.  Completing the ballot paper - and that's already an improvement on May's local elections, in which she messed up her nomination and wasn't on the ballot for her home Basildon council - is Anne Marie Waters of her For Britain party, which I shall charitably describe as another UKIP splinter.  Waters was the UKIP candidate for this seat in 2015, finishing in third place.

Despite the media coverage given to Lewisham East, overall this looks like one of those polls that's strictly for the purists, with little to get excited about for the casual observer.  And yet there are two local polls today which you've heard nothing about in the media but which look on paper far more interesting.  Turn to the next section and I'll give you the lowdown...

June 2017 result Lab 32072 C 10859 LD 2086 Grn 803 UKIP 798 Ind 355 CPA 228
May 2015 result Lab 23907 C 9574 UKIP 3886 LD 2455 Grn 2429 Lewisham People Before Profit 390 CPA 282
May 2010 result Lab 17966 LD 11750 C 9850 UKIP 771 Grn 624 EDP 426 Lewisham People Before Profit 332




Rosamund ADOO-KISSI-DEBRAH, address in the Lewisham Deptford constituency [Green Party]
Ross Kenneth ARCHER, 92 Sydenham Park Road, London SE26 4LH [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Charles Edward CAREY, address in the Lewisham East constituency
Janet Jessica DABY, address in the Lewisham East constituency [Labour Party]
Massimo James DIMAMBRO, address in the Lewisham Deptford constituency [Democrats and Veterans Party]
Sean Edward FINCH, address in the Sevenoaks constituency [Libertarian Party]
Patrick Hugo GRAY, address in the Oxford East constituency [The Radical Party]
Thomas Bartholomew HALL, address in the Epping Forest constituency [Young People's Party YPP]
Howling Laud HOPE, address in the North East Hampshire constituency [The Official Monster Raving Loony Party]
David KURTEN, address in the Old Bexley and Sidcup constituency [UKIP]
Maureen MARTIN, address in the Lewisham East constituency [Christian Peoples Alliance]
Mandu REID, 83 Revelon Road, London SE4 2PW [Women's Equality Party]
Lucy SALEK, 16 Foxwell Street, London SE4 2DX [Liberal Democrats]
Anne Marie WATERS, address in the Rayleigh and Wickford constituency [The For Britain Movement]

<hr/>

<h2>London Bridge and West Bermondsey</h2>

Southwark council, London; postponed from 3rd May following the death of Toby Eckersley, who had been nominated on the Conservative slate.  Eckersley was a long-standing former Southwark councillor, first being elected for Ruskin ward in a September 1977 by-election; with a break from 1986 to 1990, he sat for Ruskin and later Village ward on Southwark council until losing his seat in 2014.

<blockquote>
A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,
I had not thought death had undone so many.
Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,
And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
- T S Eliot, <em>The Waste Land</em>
</blockquote>

Assuming that the trains are running, we catch the train from Grove Park in Zone 4 (for now) to London Bridge in Zone 1.  This is where London began, the heart of it all.  The first London Bridge was a Roman one, built as part of their first-century road-building programme to shortcut the route from the Channel Ports to their original capital at Camulodunum - the modern Colchester.  As the lowest bridge on the Thames, it was natural for two trading and shipping settlements to spring up at either end: Londinium on the north bank, and what is now Southwark on the south bank.

The early London Bridges were timber, susceptible to being damaged or destroyed by war or natural disaster, and chronically unable to handle the traffic demand placed upon them.  In the late twelfth century, Henry II - trying to rebuild his reputation following the murder of Archbishop Thomas of Canterbury - commissioned a new bridge in stone with a chapel in the middle dedicated to St Thomas.  The Chapel of St Thomas on the Bridge became the starting point for pilgrimages to Thomas' shrine in Canterbury Cathedral, and from then on Southwark had a tourist trade to add to everything else going on there.

https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b7/London_Bridge_%281616%29_by_Claes_Van_Visscher.jpg

Which was rather a lot.  Despite damage in the Peasants' Revolt and the rebellion of Jack Cade, whose severed head turned up on a pike at the southern end of the bridge shortly afterwards <em>pour encourager les autres</em>, London Bridge was a destination in its own right.  There were all sorts of buildings on it to obstruct flow of the traffic on top, while the narrow stone arches obstructed the flow of the water below to such an extent that the river on the upstream side was prone to freezing over in winter.  Hence the famous "frost fairs".

The 1830s changed all that.  A new London Bridge, designed by John Rennie and consisting of five arches, was erected 100 feet upstream of the original one; the old bridge was then demolished.  Because of the new alignment new approach roads were needed which, given the price of land in London even then, cost three times as much as the actual bridge.  Central government had to pick up some of the tab.  This is the bridge which was sold to the Americans in 1968 and replaced by the bridge which stands today; contrary to urban legend, the Americans knew exactly what they buying.

By the 1830s it was certainly high time for the old bridge to be replaced, for Southwark was a major centre in its own right.  St Thomas of Canterbury gave his name to a hospital in Southwark (since moved to Lambeth opposite the Houses of Parliament) and still here is Guy's Hospital, founded in 1721 by Thomas Guy who had been one of the few people to make a fortune out of the South Sea Bubble.  And then the railway came.  Despite its shining new rebuilt appearance, London Bridge railway station dates from 1836 making it the oldest London terminus and one of the oldest and busiest railway stations in the world; an impressive viaduct carrying eleven parallel tracks links the station with destinations in south London, Surrey and Kent.  John Davidson's turn-of-the-century complaint about London Bridge station might no longer be relevant...

<blockquote>
Inside the station, everything's so old,
So inconvenient, of such manifold
Perplexity, and, as a mole might see,
So strictly what a station shouldn't be,
That no idea minifies its crude
And yet elaborate ineptitude.
</blockquote>

...but Thameslink commuters through the station no doubt have their own gripes at the moment to replace that particular sentiment.  Maybe Heidi Alexander can sort it out.

The shiny new London Bridge station is just one of the shiny new buildings which litter this corner of Southwark.  In 2002 the Greater London Authority moved into a testicular glass building on the riverbank, City Hall; and in 2012 contstruction finished on a building which English Heritage had objected to as "a shard of glass through the heart of historic London".  The Shard is (for the moment) the tallest building in the European Union, standing 1,016 feet high; for purposes of comparison, that is the same height as the Winter Hill TV mast above Bolton.

Shiny new buildings indeed; but what of the people who live around them?  Well, it might not surprise to find that this not exactly an affluent area, although population turnover means that relying on statistics from a census taken seven years ago can be problematic.  The census district immediately to the south of London Bridge station saw population growth of over 30% between 2011 and 2014.  One corner of the ward turned up with a large Filipino population in the census, which is a feature often seen in the vicinity of major hospitals.

The high population growth makes things difficult to compare, because it meant that Southwark council got new ward boundaries in the May 2018 election.  London Bridge and West Bermondsey is one of those brand new wards, mostly based on the old Grange ward (the Grange here referring to the former Bermondsey Abbey) together with part of the more yuppie Riverside ward.  In 2011 Southwark Riverside was in the top 25 wards in England and Wales for the 30-44 age bracket, the top 60 for population born in the pre-2004 EU states, the top 80 wards in England and Wales for "higher management" occupations in 2011 and the top 100 for full-time employment.  Southwark Grange wasn't quite so extreme but still had a large professional cohort.  Yet both wards also turn up with substantial amounts of social housing.

An interesting social mix indeed; and trying to translate this into political runes is made even more difficult by the fact that this is Southwark.  Simon Hughes represented this corner of London for over two decades in the Liberal and then Lib Dem interest, and while he may be off the scene now his political machine appears to be still in fairly good working order.  This election will complete the 2018 Southwark council election which currently stands at 49 Labour and 11 Lib Dem councillors - those Lib Dem councillors include full slates in the neighbouring wards of Borough and Bankside, and North Bermondsey which are not too socially dissimilar.

Looking at the two predecessor wards, the old Grange ward had a full slate of Lib Dem councillors until 2014 when Labour gained one of the three seats.  Shares of the vote that year were 29% each for Labour and the Lib Dems, and 14% each for the Conseratives and UKIP.  Riverside was a safe Lib Dem ward; in 2014 the Lib Dems had 40% to 20% for Labour, 15% for the Conservatives and 12% for the Greens.  In the 2016 GLA elections both wards voted for Sadiq Khan as Mayor, Grange being 50% Khan, 21% for Zac Goldsmith (C) and 11% for Caroline Pidgeon (LD) and Riverside splitting 43% Khan, 26% Goldsmith and 14% Pidgeon; in the London Members ballot Labour carried Grange with 41% (to 17% for the Conservatives, 15% for the Lib Dems and 11% for the Greens) and Riverside with just 33% (to 21% for the Conservatives, 20% for the Lib Dems and 10% for the Greens).

Game on, you might say.  I'll start with the Lib Dem slate where New Zealand-born Damian O'Brien, outgoing councillor for Grange ward and deputy leader of Southwark's Lib Dem group, is seeking re-election for a second term of office.  He is joined on the Lib Dem slate by Humaira Ali (who according to her biography specialises in change management) and William Houngbo (a businessman who was born in West Africa and raised in France).  The Labour slate is John Batteson (works for a children's charity), Julie Eyles (employment law solicitor) and Edward McDonagh (works for an education charity).  Hannah Ginnett has been nominated to replace the late Toby Eckersley, and she joins on the Tory slate Nathan Newport Gay and Richard Packer.  Completing the ballot paper is a two-man Green slate of Bernard Creely and Claude Werner.  With UKIP not standing, those are your eleven candidates for the three available seats.

Parliamentary constituency: Bermondsey and Old Southwark

No previous results on these boundaries

Humaira ALI, 12 Weightman House, 124a Spa Road, London SE16 3FG [Liberal Democrat]
John Seymour BATTESON, Unit 304, Crown Place Apartments, 20 Varcoe Road, London SE16 3AD [Labour Party]
Bernard John CREELY, 33 Albion Street, London SE16 7HZ [Green Party]
Julie EYLES, Flat 1, William Evans House, Haddonfield, London SE8 5AU [Labour Party]
Hannah Elizabeth GINNETT, 41 Anchor Street, London SE16 3LT [Conservative Party Candidate]
William HOUNGBO, 61 Bartholomew Street, London SE1 4AL [Liberal Democrat]
Edward Joseph MCDONAGH, Flat 19, Keswick House, Crawford Estate, London SE5 9NL [Labour Party]
Nathan NEWPORT GAY, 13 Henshaw Street, London SE17 1PE [Conservative Party Candidate]
Damian Shaun O'BRIEN, Flat 8, Robert Jones House, Eveline Lowe Estate, London SE16 3SR [Liberal Democrat]
Richard John PACKER, 113 St George's Road, London SE1 6HY [Conservative Party Candidate]
Claude Rubio WERNER, Flat 47, Lupin Point, Abbey Street, London SE1 2DW [Green Party]

<hr/>

<h2>Town</h2>

Doncaster council, South Yorkshire; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor John McHale on health grounds.  He had served since 2006, sitting for Central ward until 2015 and this ward since then.

We come out of the Great Wen to another town founded by the Romans.  Doncaster lies at a crossing point of the River Don, on a secondary route between Lincoln and York which avoided the Humber crossing at Brough.  The Romans built a fort to protect the crossing, with the name Danum.  Replace the Roman road with the Great North Road, and the Great North Road with the A1, and Doncaster remains an important communications centre: it's a junction and major station on the East Coast railway line, and distribution centres and warehouses litter the outskirts of the town.  Donny was an industrial centre from the eighteenth century thanks to its transport links together with substantial coal reserves under the town.  Tourist money is brought here by Doncaster Racecourse, home of the classic horse race the St Leger each September.

Running from the town centre to the racecourse, Town ward was created by boundary changes in 2015 and has no direct predecessor: it took areas from the former Wheatley, Town Moor and Central wards.  All three of those wards had elected Lib Dem councillors at some point before the Coalition years, but by 2014 Labour had a full slate.  That carried over to the new Town ward, which voted Labour in 2015 with UKIP in second.  UKIP didn't stand in the 2017 election and that produced a very interesting result: Labour held the ward with 39%, but finishing second was Chris Whitwood, deputy leader of the Yorkshire Party, who had 26%.  The Conservatives were third with 21%.  Whitwood was simultaneously the Yorkshire Party candidate for Mayor of Doncaster in 2017, coming fifth in that election across the borough and narrowly saving his deposit.

Defending for Labour is an interesting choice of candidate.  In an age when every Labour selection seems to perceived through a binary choice of Corbynite or otherwise, Tosh McDonald is as Corbynite as they get: he is the president of the ASLEF railway union, although with his long white hair and biker tattoos McDonald is probably not what you expected a union boss to look like.  Returning from last year is Chris Whitwood of the Yorkshire Party; for those who are not from the wrong side of the Pennines this is a serious regionalist movement campaigning for a devolved Yorkshire Parliament, which put up 21 candidates in last year's general election.  The Tories have selected Carol Greenhalgh, who works on various government research studies including child care and education, following a long career as a teacher.  Also standing on a longer ballot paper than last time are Julie Buckley for the Green Party, indepndent candidate Gareth Pendry and Ian Smith of the Lib Dems.

Parliamentary constituency: Doncaster Central

May 2017 result Lab 1818/1677/1603 Yorks Party 1195 C 1003 Grn 637
May 2015 result Lab 2662/2633/2591 UKIP 1500/1452 C 1306 Grn 972 TUSC 394/296

Julie BUCKLEY, 46 Ferrers Road, Doncaster DN2 4BX [Green Party]
Carol GREENHALGH, 16 Park Avenue, Sprotbrough, Doncaster DN5 7LW [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Tosh MCDONALD, 23 Rockingham Road, Doncaster DN2 4BN [Labour Party]
Gareth PENDRY, 24 Osborne Road, Doncaster DN2 5BY [Independent]
Ian Michael SMITH, 2 Airedale Avenue, Tickhill, Doncaster DN11 9UD [Liberal Democrats]
Chris WHITWOOD, Apartment 15, Kings Arcade, St Sepulchre Gate, Doncaster DN1 1AN [The Yorkshire Party]
