One Monday by-election on 5th December 2016:

<hr>

<h2>CARNOUSTIE AND DISTRICT</h2>

Angus council; caused by the death of Scottish National Party councillor Helen Oswald at the age of 69.  The Provost of Angus since 2012, Oswald was first elected in 1999, serving for Sidlaw East ward until 2007.  Before moving into politics she had worked in insurance, as an estate agent and for the council.  Her daughter Kirsten has served since 2015 as MP for East Renfrewshire.

http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/misc/angus-carnoustie-district.png

Last Monday we were in Arbroath; for our second Monday by-election in as many weeks we travel a few miles west along the coast to Carnoustie.  Known worldwide for its golf course, which is on the Open Championship rota, Carnoustie developed in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as a centre for linen weaving and tourism - it was promoted as the Brighton of the North.  While the town does still attract tourists - although these days for the golf rather than the bathing - the economy is now based on commuting to Dundee along the A92 and the railway line, although two of the three stations within this ward - Barry Links and Golf Street - only get two trains a day and usually finish near the top of the annual list of the UK's least-used railway stations.  The ward also includes a rural hinterland running inland as far as the Monikie reservoir.  Although golf isn't the only sport in town - the Barry Buddon rifle range hosted the shooting events at the 1986 and 2014 Commonwealth Games - the difficulty of the course in the 1999 Open, memorable for the French golfer Jean van de Velde blowing a huge lead on the final hole, inspired the term "Carnoustie effect" for the shock created when false assumptions meet reality.

The Scottish National Party - for whom Carnoustie is a traditionally strong area - have been suffering a little from the Carnoustie effect of late.  They dominated the 2007 election here, polling 47% and winning two of the three seats, the other seat going to Labour; but at the end of 2010 one of the SNP councillors resigned on health grounds and the Nationalists lost the by-election in February 2011 to independent candidate Brian Boyd, who started 37 votes behind the SNP but pulled ahead on transfers from the other parties to win by 28 votes.  The SNP's woes continued in the 2012 election: they failed to knock out Boyd, who topped the poll, and failed to gain the Labour seat which went to a second independent candidate, Bill Bowles, who got strong transfers from Boyd, the Conservatives and Labour; first preferences were 40% for Boyd, 36% for the SNP and 11% for Bowles.  The SNP hold the local parliamentary seat (Dundee East) and Holyrood seat (Angus South), and following their by-election gain in Arbroath last week a hold in this by-election will give them overall control of Angus council.

So, high stakes for the defending SNP candidate Mark McDonald, from Monifieth.  His toughest challenge may well come from independent candidate David Cheape, an accountant who is the only candidate to give an address in Carnoustie.  Also standing are Ray Strachan for Labour, Derek Shaw for the Conservatives and Beth Morrison for the Liberal Democrats.  Don't wait up all night for the result, as the count will start on Tuesday morning at 10am.

Parliamentary constituency: Dundee East
Scottish Parliament constituency: Angus South

May 2012 result Ind 1750 SNP 1611 Ind 483 Lab 274 C 271 LD 41
Feb 2011 by-election SNP 1289 Ind 1252 Lab 258 C 217 LD 93; final round Ind 1454 SNP 1426
May 2007 result SNP 2476 Lab 1160 C 863 LD 748 Solidarity 62

David CHEAPE, 2 Guthrie Street, Carnoustie DD7 6EL [Independent]
Mark MCDONALD, 2 Stewart Terrace, Monifieth, Dundee DD5 4DN [Scottish National Party (SNP)]
Beth MORRISON, 11 Solway Gardens, Monifieth, Dundee DD5 4TR [Scottish Liberal Democrats]
Derek SHAW, 17 The Logan, Liff, Dundee DD2 5PJ [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Ray STRACHAN, May Cottage, Nether Finlarg, Forfar DD8 1XQ [Scottish Labour Party]



By-elections on 8th December 2016:

<hr>

<h2>SLEAFORD AND NORTH HYKEHAM</h2>

House of Commons; caused by the resignation of Conservative MP Stephen Phillips, who is dissatisfied with the Government's strategy for leaving the European Union.  He had served since 2010.

For the first time since 1990 we have two parliamentary by-elections taking place in successive weeks.  After last week's sensational poll in Richmond, Surrey, today we are in a rather different part of the UK.

The Sleaford and North Hykeham constituency covers a large swathe of rural Lincolnshire to the south of Lincoln.  It is named after its only two towns.  Sleaford, the larger of the two, was once the home of the county council for the Parts of Kesteven, the south-western of Lincolnshire's three Parts, and now houses the National Centre for Craft and Design, an arts centre on a disused wharf on the River Slea.  Sleaford grew up in the 19th century as an agricultural centre, with seeds and maltings as important industries.  Rather different is North Hykeham, which is a Lincoln suburb that has never been incorporated into the city.  Also here are a couple of tiny corners of Grantham where recent development has spilled over the town limits.  But the political tone of the constituency is set by the many villages within the seat, while the presence of RAF Cranwell, at which the Royal Air Force trains its officers and flying instructors, provides a military tone to the area.  The Lincoln Cliff runs through the seat from north to south, with higher ground to the east overlooking the low-lying Trent Valley to the west and Holland to the east - the Parts of Holland, not the country on the other side of the North Sea.

The general pattern of parliamentary constituencies in what was Kesteven, with a northern and a southern seat, has survived basically unchanged since 1885 but has had varying names: from 1885 to 1918 it was called Sleaford, from 1918 to 1997 Grantham, only taking on its current name in 1997 when Grantham was moved out of the seat.  (The Boundary Commission had originally proposed resurrecting the name Mid Lincolnshire, but that didn't survive the public inquiry.)  If the proposed boundary changes go through as they are, then the Sleaford name will be revived for the 2020 election with North Hykeham moving into the Lincoln constituency.

Sleaford's first MP in 1885 was already a political veteran.  Henry Chaplin, the so-called Squire of Blankney, had been in the Commons since 1868 as MP for Mid Lincolnshire; a major landowner in the county, Chaplin was also a prominent racehorse owner whose horse, Hermit, had won the Derby in 1867.  Going into the 1885 election he had joined government for the first time as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; although he held his seat, defeating the Liberal candidate Charles Sharpe 58-42, the Tories lost that election and it took Chaplin until 1889 to join Cabinet, as the first President of the Board of Agriculture in Salisbury's administration; in order to take up that appointment Chaplin had to seek re-election in his constituency, that being the rule until the First World War; he had to seek re-election again upon his re-appointment to the Cabinet in 1895 as President of the Local Government Board, his Agriculture appointment having ended in 1892.

Chaplin wasn't included in Salisbury's cabinet after the 1900 election, and went to the backbenches where he campaigned in favour of tariff reform.  After 38 years as MP for Sleaford he was swept away in the Liberal landslide of 1906, but returned to the Commons a year later by winning a by-election in Wimbledon, and was later translated to the Lords as the first Viscount Chaplin.  In an interesting link with last week's by-election, Henry Chaplin was Zac Goldsmith's great-great-grandfather: his daughter Edith married the 7th Marquess of Londonderry, whose granddaughter Lady Annabel Vane-Tempest-Stewart married James Goldsmith.

The new Liberal MP for Sleaford was Arnold Lupton, a professor of mining at Leeds University and colliery director.  A free trade supporter, Lupton was at odds with Herbert Asquith on several issues and never got anywhere near government; Lupton was later sent to prison for pacifist activity during the Great War.  He was rather soundly defeated in the first 1910 election by Edmund Royds.

Royds, a major in the Lincolnshire Yeomanry, was a solicitor from a Cheshire family.  In opposition during the 1910-18 Parliament he concentrated on opposing Lloyd George's land tax and the consequent revaulation, before the Great War intervened.

The redistribution of 1918 abolished the Grantham parliamentary borough and moved the town of Grantham into the Sleaford constituency, which was then renamed as Grantham.  The boundary changes improved the Liberal position and Royds, who was endorsed by the Coalition, did well to be re-elected over the Liberal candidate Robert Pattinson.  In 1922 Royds' luck ran out and Pattinson won their rematch by a majority of 428 votes.  Royds didn't seek to return to Parliament after his defeat but did remain prominent in Lincolnshire public life; he was a High Sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1931 and was knighted in 1939 for political and public services in Lincolnshire.

Robert Pattinson, a railway contractor and builders merchant from Sleaford, was a long-standing member of Kesteven county council which was based in Sleaford; he joined in Parliament his brother-in-law Richard Winfrey (South West Norfolk, 1906-23) and his brother Samuel Pattinson (Horncastle, 1922-24).  His time in Parliament was a short one; the 1920s were a turbulent time in British politics and Robert Pattinson lost his seat in the 1923 election haing been an MP for only a year.  Although there was talk of Pattinson returning to Parliament in the 1937 Holland-with-Boston by-election, this didn't come to fruition and Pattinson's remaining career was spent in local government: he served for twenty years as chairman of Kesteven county council, and a secondary school in North Hykeham is still named after him today.

As stated, in 1923 Grantham went back to the Conservatives against the national trend with their new candidate Sir Richard Warrender, 8th Baronet, a godson of Queen Victoria who had won the Military Cross while serving with the Grenadier Guards in the Great War.  After being re-elected in 1924 with a much larger majority over the new Liberal candidate, the controversial former Eye MP Alexander Lyle-Samuel, Warrender embarked on a long career in various minor government positions which was only interrupted by the Tories being out of power from 1929 to 1931.  His career in government - by then as Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty - outlasted his Commons career, which was ended by his elevation to the Lords in 1942 as the first Lord Bruntisfield.

Bruntsfield's peerage meant that there would have to be a by-election in Grantham in March 1942.  This was one of the low points of the Second World War for the Allies, coming just after the fall of Singapore with the Red Army in retreat on the Eastern Front.  The Tories had selected for the by-election Sir Arthur Longmore, who had recently retired from the RAF with the rank of Air Chief Marshal; he had briefly served as Air Officer Commanding in the Middle East and, with RAF Cranwell in full swing, looked a suitable candidate.  With the wartime election truce in effect, Longmore was opposed only by independent candidate Denis Kendall, managing director of a highly productive arms production factory in Grantham, whose workers were well-paid and well-served with entertainment.  Despite disclosing officially-secret wartime production figures during the election campaign, Kendall won the by-election with a majority of just 367 votes.

Denis Kendall was a larger-than-life figure whose pre-Parliamentary career included running away to sea at 14 followed by spells raiding opium dens on the Yangtse River, as a cabaret owner in Shanghai, as a steeplejack in the USA and as works manager for the Citroen car factory in Paris.  Even before his election MI5 and MI6 had Kendall under surveillance for far-right sympathies and links to foreign companies.  That didn't stop Kendall being re-elected in 1945, but he lost a fraud case in 1949 - being ordered to repay a £15,000 investment which he had used to pay creditors - and lost his seat the following year, finishing third in Grantham with 28%.  Kendall made one attempt to get the Grantham seat back, standing in 1951 as the Liberal candidate without success.

The Tories took Grantham back in 1950 with their new candidate Eric Smith, who had a tragically short tenure in office - he died in August 1951 at the age of just 42.  With a new general election imminent no by-election was held to replace Smith, and the 1951 election returned the new Tory candidate Joseph Godber, a Bedfordshire county councillor from a farming background - he chaired the glasshouse section of the NFU and sat on the Tomato and Cucumber Marketing Board.  At the time Grantham was a marginal seat where Labour had become strong, and Godber faced a stern test in the 1955 election in which his Labour opponent was the outgoing MP Woodrow Wyatt, whose Birmingham Aston constituency had disappeared in boundary changes; he would later return to the Commons as MP for Bosworth in Leicestershire.  Godber won that election by 51% to 46%, and would go on to defeat another former Labour MP, Tom Skeffington-Lodge (Bedford, 1945-50), in the 1959 election by 57-43.  By now Godber was on the junior rungs of government, and his big break into the Cabinet came in Macmillan's 1963 reshuffle in which Godber was appointed War Secretary; however, he was in Cabinet for less than four months before being demoted when Douglas-Home came to power.  

Grantham had a close result in the Wilson landslide of 1966 when Godber won his fifth term by 48-44 over Labour's Mary Large, but in the 1970s the Labour vote collapsed and the seat became true-blue Tory.  Godber retired to the Lords in 1979.

The 1979 election returned a new MP for Grantham: Douglas Hogg, son of the long-seving MP Quintin Hogg who had been a fixture of the Tory frontbench since the Eden administration and, as a result of the Tories' return to power in 1979, became Lord Chancellor.  Douglas had the stereotypical early life for a Tory politician: Eton; Christ Church, Oxford; president of the Oxford Union in 1967; called to the Bar a year later, and took silk in 1990.  Hogg served in the Commons for 31 years, a career which is principally remembered for being Minister of Agriculture at the height of the BSE crisis in the 1990s, and for the 2009 expenses scandal in which it was revealed that Hogg had claimed and been paid £2,000 from the parliamentary expenses office for the cost of clearing the moat around his country estate.  This prompted a rather abrupt retirement from the Commons; Hogg had succeeded to the title of Viscount Hailsham in 2001, but didn't enter the Lords until he obtained a life peerage in October 2015.  In doing so, he joined his wife Sarah who is a life peer in her own right, having headed John Major's policy unit; Baroness Hogg had also worked as a journalist (briefly presenting Channel 4 News) and later became the first woman to chair a FTSE 100 company, 3i Group.

As stated, boundary changes in 1997 removed Grantham from this seat and renamed it as Sleaford and North Hykeham.  The 1997 Blair landslide was the only time since 1966 when the Tory majority fell below 10 points, so Hogg's enforced retirement in 2010 cleared the way for Stephen Phillips, a barrister and recorder who had also briefly held a commission in the Welsh Guards; his only previous electoral experience had come in 2008 when he lost a Conservative seat to the Lib Dems in a by-election to Camden council in London.  Phillips never got off the backbenches and attracted criticism during his time in Parliament for continuing to spend over 30 hours a week working as a barrister.  Although Phillips was on the Brexit side of the referendum debate, his resignation came due to "irreconcilable policy differences" with the May administration, and Phillips had previously criticised the Government's attempts to leave the EU without consulting Parliament - a subject we have heard a lot more of this week.

Phillips was certainly in tune with his constituents on the EU question - the North Kesteven local government district, on which this constituency is based, voted 62% Leave in May.  This seat is similar to Richmond Park only in the sense that it had a big Tory lead in the 2015 election: 56%, to 17% for Labour and 16% for UKIP.  All five candidates in 2015 saved their deposit, including independent candidate Marianne Overton, leader of the Lincolnshire Independents council group, who had also saved her deposit here in 2010.

http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/misc/sleaford-n-hykeham15.png

The local elections in 2015, held on the same day as the general election, are rather difficult to interpret because most wards only had Tory and Independent candidates, and two wards had unopposed returns.  The pink areas on the map above are Lincolnshire Independent seats, except for the one in North Hykeham which went to a Hykeham Independent candidate.   In by-elections in 2015 the Tories held Belvoir ward (not all of which is within this seat) and gained a Lincolnshire Independent seat in North Hykeham Mill; but the Lincolnshire Independents have done well in 2016's by-elections, gaining Ashby de la Launde and Cranwell ward from the Conservatives and holding a seat in Cliff Villages ward.

http://www.andrewteale.me.uk/misc/sleaford-n-hykeham13.png

The 2013 Lincolnshire county council elections demonstrate the former Lib Dem vote in North Hykeham, but judging from the lack of candidates there in 2015 the party's administration in this seat seems to have fallen apart.  The Conservatives held a by-election in Grantham Barrowby in 2015.

This is one of the areas of England least affected by the immigration and social changes of the last few decades - the non-white population is just 1% and EU immigration rates are low (and mostly concentrated in Sleaford town).  The constituency also has a large retired population and scored very highly on the census for Christianity.

With little to indicate that any other party is putting in a strong campaign, the Tory candidate should have little to lose sleep over.  She is Caroline Johnson, a consultant paediatrician who fought Scunthorpe in the 2010 general election.  Equality campaigners will note that if she is elected the proportion of female MPs will rise above 30% for the first time.

The Labour candidate is local resident Jim Clarke, a binman, former postman and GMB activist.

UKIP have selected Victoria Ayling, a Lincolnshire county councillor representing Spilsby Fen division.  She was the Conservative candidate for Great Grimsby in the 2010 general election, losing to Austin Mitchell by just 714 votes, and stood there again in 2015 as the UKIP candidate, blowing what had been seen as one of the party's top targets; in May she was the UKIP candidate for Lincolnshire police and crime commissioner.

The Lib Dem candidate is Ross Pepper, who lives in Lincoln and fought that seat in the 2015 general election.  

Marianne Overton is standing again for the Lincolnshire Independents after saving her deposit in 2010 and 2015; she is the Lincolnshire county councillor for Branston and Navenby division and represents Cliff Villages ward on North Kesteven council.  

However, turning to the other candidates on the ballot paper suggests that the Lincolnshire Independents have suffered a split.  Mark Suffield, who is a Lincolnshire Independent mmeber of North Kesteven district council (representing Sleaford Quarrington and Mareham ward) is standing without a ballot paper description, as is Paul Coyne who was elected to Sleaford town council on the Lincolnshire Independents ticket.  Yet another independent candidate on the ballot paper is Sarah Stock, who is campaigning on a Save the NHS ticket and is endorsed by the Green Party.  Completing the ballot paper are Peter Hill of the Official Monster Raving Loony Party, standing under the pseudonym "The Iconic Arty-Pole", and regular by-election candidate David Bishop for his Bus-Pass Elvis Party.

May 2015 result C 34805 Lab 10690 UKIP 9716 LD 3500 Lincs Ind 3233
May 2010 result C 30719 LD 10814 Lab 10051 Lincs Ind 3806 UKIP 2163 BNP 1977

The Iconic ARTY-POLE, Ivy House Farm, Main Road, Great Carlton, Louth LN11 8JU [The Official Monster Raving Loony Party]
Victoria Carolyn AYLING, Stickford House, Back Lane, Stickford, Boston PE22 8EW [UKIP]
David Laurence BISHOP, 26 Falcon Grove, Nottingham NG7 7NB [Bus-Pass Elvis Party]
Jim CLARKE, address in the Sleaford and North Hykeham constituency [Labour Party]
Paul COYNE, address in the Sleaford and North Hykeham constituency
Caroline Elizabeth JOHNSON, Hill Farm Cottage, Carlton Road, Sudbrook, Grantham NG32 3SG [The Conservative Party Candidate]
Marianne Jane OVERTON, Hilltop Farm, Soggin Lane, Welbourn, Lincoln LN5 0QH [Lincolnshire Independents]
Ross David PEPPER, 11 Roydon Grove, Lincoln LN6 7QP [Liberal Democrats]
Sarah Kay STOCK, address in the Grantham and Stamford constituency [Independent]
Mark Robert Arthur SUFFIELD, 80 Mareham Lane, Sleaford NG34 7FT


UNIVERSITY AND SCOTFORTH RURAL, Lancaster council; caused by the resignation of Labour councillor Matt Mann.


MADELEY, Newcastle-under-Lyme council, Staffordshire; caused by the death of Billy Welsh who had been elected as Labour but had left the party.


HORSEHAY AND LIGHTMOOR, Telford and Wrekin council, Shropshire; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Clive Mollett.


MALDON WEST, Maldon council, Essex; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Charles Mackenzie.


TRENCH, Tonbridge and Malling council, Kent; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Jean Atkinson.




