SUNNINGHILL AND SOUTH ASCOT, Windsor and Maidenhead council, Berkshire; caused by the resignation of Conservative councillor George Bathurst, who had served since 2011.  He is concentrating his time on promoting the Windsor Link railway project, which aims to link together Windsor's two railway stations and connect them to Heathrow Airport.

As many disappointed bondholders in Lloyds Bank found out last week, it's always important to read the small print.  Electoral law has a lot of small print in it, and it's in a rather sorry state at the moment: the law governing elections in the UK was last consolidated in 1983, and the many electoral changes and constitutional innovations that have happened since then (the devolved institutions in Scotland, Wales and London, postal voting on demand, elected mayors, police and crime commissioners, the short-lived Inner London Education Authority) have resulted in bits and pieces being bolted on to the 1983 law until it's started to sag under its own weight.  One of the most impenetrable parts of electoral law relates to combination of polls, with the point of this being to streamline two elections which take place simultaneously: for example, allowing both ballot papers to be issued by the same polling staff.  Not all possible poll combinations are allowable, and the Government had to rush out new rules earlier this year to allow Welsh Assembly elections to be combined with Police and Crime Commissioner elections.

It's not just the new bits that cause problems - the law on challenging elections, which has to be done by what is essentially a private legal action, has failed to keep up with the times and in many cases the wording is unchanged from the Victorian original.  In one of the most sensational electoral legal actions of recent years, the Tower Hamlets case of 2015, this caused problems for the Commissioner who had to deal with allegations of what was essentially religious intimidation: the very name of the electoral offence ("undue spiritual influence") is unambiguously Christian and all the relevant case law involved Catholicism in late nineteenth-century Ireland, yet the case was being tried in a twenty-first-century context and the religion involved was Islam.  The original Victorian drafters would have been astonished if they could have known that we were still going to be arguing over their words one-and-a-half centuries later and under circumstances they could probably never have envisaged.

A lot has happened in those one-and-a-half centuries, of course.  Within fifty years of those words being drafted, Europe was convulsed by war from end to end.  In one corner of the edge of Europe in 1915, thousands of men from the Lancashire town of Bury died fighting the Turks in what was ultimately a futile action on the Gallipoli peninsula of Turkey.  There but for the grace of God, etc.  The Turks have been magnanimous in victory - the second-in-command of the Turkish defence, one Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, later sought to reassure the women of Bury that their lost loved ones were "lying in the soil of a friendly country", had "become our sons now" and there was "no difference between the Johnnies and the Mehmets to us where they lie side by side here in this country of hours".  In the words of the Rector of Bury in this year's Gallipoli Sunday commemoration service, which was also addressed by the Turkish consul, "Amen to that".

Not all countries were as generous in victory in that most appalling of wars, and in retrospect the Treaty of Versailles set in motion a serious of unintended consequences which came to a head in another world war just twenty years later.  There but for the grace of God, etc.  The result of that war left Europe, and Germany, divided and the long-term outlook was clearly not stable.

Yet in 1945 the cycle of war and peace that had plagued western Europe since time immemorial stopped, and has not yet restarted.  One reason for this military: the development of nuclear weapons and the concept of mutually assured destruction, together with the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty and the Warsaw Pact in which Europe's military forces on opposing sides of the Iron Curtain pooled together.  Another reason was political, and was brought about by Robert Schuman, a Luxembourg-born lawyer who had been transferred from Germany to France with Alsace-Lorraine and in the inter-war period had done most of the work to sort out the differences between Alsatian and French law.  During the Second World War he had served in the Vichy government, joined the Resistance and narrowly escaped being sent to Dachau.  In a speech in Strasbourg in May 1949, Schuman reviewed previous attempts to guarantee an eternal peace in Europe - by the Roman church of the Middle Ages, by the creation of a world empire under German auspices, by the great philosophers of Europe from Dante to Thomas More to Proudhon - and rejected nationalism in favour of reconciling nations in a supranational association.  Schuman wanted to make futher war in Europe "not only unthinkable but materially impossible".  The immediate outcome was the European Coal and Steel Community, which helped to bring what was by now West Germany back into the community of nations by creating a common market for coal and steel in western Europe.

The ECSC was seen as a success and was joined in 1957 by two futher organisations, the European Economic Community which aimed to create a common market and a customs union, and Euratom which was to promote co-operation for nuclear energy. The EEC quickly became the most important of the three Communities, and in the 1960s it established a common agricultural policy among its members and removed some tariffs.  

By this time the Macmillan government in Britain had applied to join the EEC along with Ireland, Denmark and Norway.  That application was vetoed by French President Charles de Gaulle, but in 1967 the Wilson government reapplied for membership, and the UK acceded to the EEC in 1973 along with Ireland and Denmark.  The European Parliament, the EEC's legislative assembly, was first directly elected in 1979 and has steadily increased its pwer since then, essentially imposing its choice of candidate to lead the European Commission in 2014.

Reforms in the 1980s led to the Schengen Agreement of 1985 and the Single European Act of 1986, both of which promoted trade in the EEC: Schengen by abolishing internal border controls and harmonising visa policies, and the Single European Act by establishing a single market removing barriers to movement of capital, labour, enterprise and services within the EEC.  The UK is a signatury to the Single European Act but not to Schengen and retains border controls with the rest of the EU (and the rest of the world) to this day.

Then in 1992 two things happened.  The first was the Treaty of Maastricht, which created the European Union and led to the formation of its single currency, the euro.  The second was Black Wednesday, the sixteenth day of September, in which a run on the pound forced Britain out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the precursor to the euro, and destroyed the Conservative Party's reputation for economic competence for a generation.  At the same time the Major government, with its small majority in the House of Commons, was having trouble getting the Maastricht treaty ratified, with a small number of backbench MPs disrupting a serious of votes on the treaty throughout late 1992 and early 1993.  With the Conservative party consumed by infighting over Europe, its reputation for political competence went down the Swanee as well, and the result was the party's enormous defeat in the 1997 general election.

With the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, the breakup of Yugoslavia and the end of communism, the new democracies of Eastern Europe looked at the EU and liked what they saw.  East Germany was the first former Communist state to accede in 1990 upon German reunification, and most of the rest followed in 2004.  Today the only European countries outside the club are Russia, Norway (which rejected membership in two referendums), the perennial special case of Switzerland, war-torn Ukraine, autocratic Belarus, divided Moldova, Albania, Turkey (if Turkey counts as European), various parts of the former Yugoslavia and the microstates.  In 2012 your columnist holidayed in Tartu, Estonia, which less than 25 years earlier had been a closed town to foreigners, without so much as needing a visa, and was able to keep the change to spend in France the following year.  By contrast, on my previous visit to Estonia in 2005 for the European Quiz Championships, one of the participants, a Croatian woman working in the UK, was given the third degree by British immigration on her return and nearly not allowed back into the country.  Sixty years before that, Germany and the USSR were fighting over who controlled Estonia.  That's how far we've come.

It's fair to say that the split in the Conservative party has never really recovered since 1992 and 1993.  This has been reflected in the party's actions since its 1997 defeat: Hague's "last chance to save the pound" in 2001, the election and subsequent defenestration of the Maastricht rebel Iain Duncan Smith as party leader, the promise (later withdrawn) of a referendum on the Lisbon treaty of 2007 on reform of the EU, and the inclusion of a referendum on EU membership in the 2015 Tory manifesto.  With opinion polls in advance of the 2015 election pointing to another hung parliament and the other major parties in Parliament being strongly in favour of EU membership, David Cameron may have reasonably thought he would never have to go through with that promise.  Instead of which, the Conservatives won an unexpected small majority in Parliament, and the infighting within the party over the EU has resumed with all the venom of the Major years.  It's 1993 all over again, but this time we're all invited to join in the argument.

This isn't the place to start going into the Remain arguments over economics and the Leave arguments over immigration.  It's sufficient for the purposes of this week's column that we are having a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU, which brings me back to my original point about the state of electoral law and combination of polls.  Perhaps in order that there aren't any distractions from the referendum, the Government didn's make any provision for this referendum to be combined with any other poll, and the Electoral Commission tried to persuade returning officers and local parties not to schedule any local by-elections for this week.  Unfortunately, either the message didn't reach Ascot or the local parties didn't bother to read the small print; whatever the reason, the electors of Sunninghill and South Ascot are going to have to queue up at two separate polling stations in order to cast their votes and the returning officer is going to have to incur the hassle of accommodating and the expense of staffing two separate polling stations.  Not good.

Anyway, this ward is fairly well described by its name, and is generally built-up and residential although it does include the Georgian country house of Tittenhurst Park, home at various times to the philanthropist Thomas Holloway, the prison reformer and London county councillor Xenia Field, the entrepreneur and failed Liberal Party candidate Peter Cadbury, John Lennon (who built a recording studio in the grounds), fellow Beatle Ringo Starr and Abu Dhabi ruler Sheikh Zayed.  South Ascot is the less fashionable part of Ascot (if such a thing can be said to exist) although it was once home to the exiled King Zog of Albania; its census statistics are skewed by the presence of St Mary's boarding school, which propels the ward into the top 100 in the UK for population aged 16 or 17.  Ascot railway station (which lies on the Waterloo-Reading line and is a junction for trains to Guildford) can be found on the ward's northern boundary.

The ward is as Tory as you might expect and has got more so over the course of this century.  At the most recent election in 2015 the Tories had 42% of the vote here, with the Lib Dems (13%), an independent candidate (13%) and the Green Party (11%) leading a five-way fight to be runner-up.

Defending for the Conservatives is Julian Sharpe, who lives in Sunninghill and is an organiser for the local carnival.  The Lib Dem candidate is Tamasin Barnbrook, who fought Ascot and Cheapside ward last year.  The Independent candidate from last time is not trying again and neither are the Greens, so the ballot paper is completed by Spike Humphrey for Labour and Nicole Fowler for UKIP.

Parliamentary constituency: Windsor

May 2015 result C 2012/1852/1635 LD 621/499 Ind 604 Grn 542 Lab 504 UKIP 492
May 2011 result C 1334/1326/1318 LD 430/268/235 Lab 420 Grn 339
May 2007 result C 1076/1072/1058 LD 542/455/441 Lab 163
May 2003 result C 914/904/896 LD 698/686/678 Grn 145 Lab 136

Tamasin BARNBROOK, 3 New Mile Court, London Road, Ascot SL5 7EH [Liberal Democrats]
Nicole FOWLER, 16 Stonebridge Field, Eton, Windsor SL4 6PS [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Spike HUMPHREY, 12 Llanvair Drive, Ascot SL5 9HT [Labour Party Candidate]
Julian Edward SHARPE, 4 Highclere, Sunninghill, Ascot SL5 0AA [The Conservative Party Candidate]