After a manic few weeks on the local by-election front, it's time to quieten down for the summer holidays.  There are three polls this week, one in England and two in Scotland, with the three big parties at Westminster defending one seat each.


IRVINE WEST, North Ayrshire council; caused by the resignation of SNP councillor Ruth Maguire, who was elected to Holyrood in May as the MSP for Cunninghame South.  She had served since 2012.

For the first of the week's two Scottish by-elections we are in Ayrshire in a town both old and New.  Irvine was one of Scotland's most important towns in the Middle Ages as one of the major ports on the west coast; although the port declined during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries it remained strategically important as a base for the ICI-Nobel explosives factory in nearby Stevenston.  Famous people associated with the old town include Edgar Allen Poe, who attended the local grammar school for a short time, and Robert Burns who worked for some months at a local heckling shop - not the council chamber but a location for preparing flax for spinning.

Irvine was changed out of all recognition in the 1960s by being designated as a New Town, and now has a population of around 34,000, with construction and retail being the major sectors of the local economy.  In its New Town guise Irvine has given Scotland not one but two First Ministers - Jack McConnell, who was brought up on Arran but born here, and a then 21-year-old law student who appeared on the ballot paper in 1992 for Irvine North ward in the last elections to Cunninghame district council, shortly after being the SNP candidate in Glasgow Shettleston in the previous month's general election - Nicola Sturgeon, the present First Minister of Scotland.  

Sturgeon's old stomping ground has voted Nationalist at every level since 2012, even in the independence referendum in which the ward was 50.6% Yes.  However, Scotland's local councils were last elected in 2012 which was before Labour fell apart in the country, and in the 2012 elections to Irvine West ward Labour topped the poll with 40% to 37% for the SNP and 12% for the Conservatives.  In the previous 2007 election Labour had won two seats to one each for the SNP and Tories, but the Tory seat was only won because the SNP only stood one candidate that year; in 2012 the SNP made no such mistake and Ruth Maguire narrowly beat the Tories to gain the final seat by 67 votes.

Defending for the SNP is a semi-celebrity candidate: Robin Sturgeon, father of Nicola.  Labour have selected Louise McPhater, a mother of four children and Glasgow University student who works at a local community centre.  The Tory candidate is Angela Stephen; also standing are Nick Smith for the Lib Dems, regular Socialist Labour Party candidate Bobby Cochrane and the ward's first Green candidate Joan McCormick.  As with all Scottish local by-elections since the introduction of PR in 2007, the Alternative Vote will be used.  No doubt all the candidates will be hoping to emulate the old motto of the Royal Burgh of Irvine: Tandem bona causa triumphat (the good cause triumphs in the end).

Westminster constituency: Central Ayrshire
Holyrood constituency: Cunninghame South

May 2012 result Lab 2065 SNP 1889 C 614 LD 246 Ind 187 Soc Lab 81 TUSC 51
May 2007 result Lab 2994 SNP 2247 C 799 Solidarity 517 LD 453 Soc Lab 103

Bobby COCHRANE, Flat A, 43 East Road, Irvine KA12 0BS [Socialist Labour Party]
Joan McCORMICK, 17 Mill Road, Kilbirnie KA25 7DZ [Scottish Green Party]
Louise McPHATER, 30 Queen Road, Irvine KA12 0XA [Scottish Labour Party]
Nick SMITH, 3 Bonnyton Row, Girdle Toll, Irvine KA11 1NQ [Scottish Liberal Democrats]
Angela STEPHEN, 21 Kilpatrick Place, Bourtreehill South, Irvine KA11 1JZ [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Robin STURGEON, 55 Broomlands Road, Dreghorn, Irvine KA11 4EX [Scottish National Party (SNP)]


RENFREW SOUTH AND GALLOWHILL, Renfrewshire council; caused by the death of Labour councillor Eddie Grady at the age of 66.  He had served since 2007.

Take the train from Irvine towards Glasgow and the last stop before Glasgow for most trains is Paisley Gilmour Street, which lies at the south-west corner of this ward.  Running roughly between the railway line and the M8 motorway is the troubled housing estate of Gallowhill, one of three parts of this ward; to the south-east is the large Hillington industrial estate, while to the north of the motorway lies a large amount of new housing on the site of the former Renfrew Airport, in operation from 1933 (the first regular destination was Campbeltown) to 1966 when its services transferred to the present Glasgow Airport nearby.  The ward's good transport links to Glasgow make this an economically mixed area with something for everyone.

In the two previous elections on these boundaries Renfrew South and Gallowhill has been a close Labour-SNP fight with Labour having the edge: Labour led 43-38 in the 2007 election and 48-43 in 2012, and in both elections comfortably won two seats to the SNP's one.  However, that was before Labour's vote in Scotland imploded, and Labour have a real fight on their hands to hold this seat.

Defending for Labour is Edward Grady, Eddie's son, who holds the rank of Captain in the Army (he is the commander of a local company of cadets) and works in education as a support worker.  The SNP candidate is Jim Paterson, a community campaigner, former trade union activist and caseworker for the local SNP MP Gavin Newlands.  Also standing are Mark Dougan for the Tories and Ross Stalker for the Lib Dems.

Westminster constituency: Paisley and Renfrewshire North
Holyrood constituency: Renfrewshire North and West

May 2012 result Lab 2098 SNP 1887 C 197 SSP 90 LD 86
May 2007 result Lab 2348 SNP 2087 Ind 294 C 291 LD 246 Solidarity 127 SSP 90

Mark DOUGAN, 98 Newmains Road, Renfrew PA4 0NH [Scottish Conservative and Unionist]
Edward GRADY, 54 Lang Avenue, Renfrew PA4 0EA [Scottish Labour Party]
Jim PATERSON, 5 Beechwood Drive, Renfrew PA4 0PW [Scottish National Party (SNP)]
Ross STALKER, Flat Ground/2, 2 Blythswood Road, Renfrew PA4 8NU [Scottish Liberal Democrats]


OMBERSLEY, Worcestershire county council; caused by the death of Conservative councillor Maurice Broomfield at the age of 87.  A fruit farmer from Bromsgrove, Broomfield was one of the members of the original Bromsgrove district council elected in 1973, and was chairman of that council in 1977-78; after losing his district council seat to Labour in the Tory nadir of 1995 he was returned to Worcestershire county council, where he had served since its divorce from Herefordshire in 1997.

Altogether now: dum-de-dum-de-dum-de-dum, dum-de-dum-de-daa-d (switches radio off).  The music just quoted may be named after the Yorkshire village of Barwick in Elmet, but for many years now it has been used to introduce The Archers, that simple saga of farming folk which is generally accepted to be inspired by the Worcestershire villages of Inkberrow and Hanbury.  Hanbury forms part of the Ombersley division of Worcestershire county council, a sprawling rural area which wraps around the north side of Droitwich and is clearly the bit which was left over after the rest of Wychavon district had had its county divisions drawn.  The largest centres of population are Hartlebury and Ombersley on the Worcester-Kidderminster road; Ombersley has for centuries been the seat of the Lords Sandys, a family which has participated in government for centuries (Edwin Sandys was Archbishop of York under Elizabeth I; Samuel, 1st Lord Sandys was Chancellor of the Exchequer under the Earl of Wilmington; most recently Richard Hill, 7th Lord Sandys was a Lords Whip under Heath and Thatcher) while at Hartlebury can be found Hartlebury Castle, former residence of the Bishops of Worcester and home to the Worcestershire County Museum; and the division's only railway station on the Birmingham-Kidderminster-Worcester line.  

Broomfield had a safe seat, although he was run relatively close by UKIP at his final re-election in 2013, winning 48-33.  It's difficult to compare last year's Wychavon district council results with this, partly because the ward boundaries don't match up and partly because of a lack of UKIP candidates for the district council, but the Tories hold all the district council seats within the division.

Defending for the Conservatives is Peter Tomlinson, district councillor for Ombersley and hoping to make the step up to county level.  The official UKIP candidate is Richard Keel, who fought most of this area last year as parliamentary candidate for Mid Worcestershire. Doug Ingram, a Hartlebury parish councillor who was the UKIP candidate here in the 2013 county elections, stands as an independent.  Completing the ballot paper is the Lib Dem candidate Peter Evans.

Parliamentary constituency: Mid Worcestershire (part: Dodderhill, Hartlebury and Ombersley wards and part of Lovett and North Claines ward), Redditch (part: part of Inkberrow ward)
Wychavon district council wards: Dodderhill, Hartlebury, Inkberrow (part: Hanbury, and Stock and Bradley parishes), Lovett and North Claines (part: Elmbridge, Elmley Lovett, Hampton Lovett and Westwood parishes), Ombersley

May 2013 result C 1292 UKIP 894 Lab 231 LD 139 Grn 137
June 2009 result C 2296 LD 561 Grn 327 Lab 201
May 2005 result C 3344 Lab 945 LD 916

Peter Reginald EVANS, Iona, Chequers Lane, Wychbold, Droitwich WR9 7PH [Liberal Democrats]
Doug INGRAM, Brick Kiln Piece, Whitneys Farm, Parsonage Lane, Ombersley, Droitwich WR9 0HP [Independent]
Richard KEEL, Kilkenny, Grafton Flyford, Worcester WR7 4PJ [UK Independence Party (UKIP)]
Peter TOMLINSON, Lineholt Grange, Lineholt, Ombersley, Droitwich WR9 0LG [Conservative Party]